Part I. SCHOOL EDUCATION

This policy envisages that the extant 10+2 structure in school education will be modified with a new
pedagogical and curricular restructuring of 5+3+3+4 covering ages 3-18 as shown in the
representative figure and elaborated in detail later under Chapter 4.
Currently, children in the age group of 3-6 are not covered in the 10+2 structure as Class 1 begins at
age 6. In the new 5+3+3+4 structure, a strong base of Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE)
from age 3 is also included, which is aimed at promoting better overall learning, development, and
well-being.


1. Early Childhood Care and Education: The Foundation of Learning

1.1. Over 85% of a child’s cumulative brain development occurs prior to the age of 6, indicating the
critical importance of appropriate care and stimulation of the brain in the early years in order to
ensure healthy brain development and growth. Presently, quality ECCE is not available to crores of
young children, particularly children from socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds. Strong
investment in ECCE has the potential to give all young children such access, enabling them to
participate and flourish in the educational system throughout their lives. Universal provisioning of
quality early childhood development, care, and education must thus be achieved as soon as possible,
and no later than 2030, to ensure that all students entering Grade 1 are school ready.

1.2. ECCE ideally consists of flexible, multi-faceted, multi-level, play-based, activity-based, and
inquiry-based learning, comprising of alphabets, languages, numbers, counting, colours, shapes,
indoor and outdoor play, puzzles and logical thinking, problem-solving, drawing, painting and other
visual art, craft, drama and puppetry, music and movement. It also includes a focus on developing
social capacities, sensitivity, good behaviour, courtesy, ethics, personal and public cleanliness,
teamwork, and cooperation. The overall aim of ECCE will be to attain optimal outcomes in the
domains of: physical and motor development, cognitive development, socio-emotional-ethical
development, cultural/artistic development, and the development of communication and early
language, literacy, and numeracy.

1.3. A National Curricular and Pedagogical Framework for Early Childhood Care and Education
(NCPFECCE) for children up to the age of 8 will be developed by NCERT in two parts, namely, a
sub-framework for 0-3 year-olds, and a sub-framework for 3-8 year-olds, aligned with the above
guidelines, the latest research on ECCE, and national and international best practices. In particular,
the numerous rich local traditions of India developed over millennia in ECCE involving art, stories,
poetry, games, songs, and more, will also be suitably incorporated. The framework will serve as a
guide both for parents and for early childhood care and education institutions.

1.4. The overarching goal will be to ensure universal access to high-quality ECCE across the country
in a phased manner. Special attention and priority will be given to districts and locations that are
particularly socio-economically disadvantaged. ECCE shall be delivered through a significantly
expanded and strengthened system of early-childhood education institutions consisting of (a) stand-
alone Anganwadis; (b) Anganwadis co-located with primary schools; (c) pre-primary
schools/sections covering at least age 5 to 6 years co-located with existing primary schools; and (d)
stand-alone pre-schools - all of which would recruit workers/teachers specially trained in the
curriculum and pedagogy of ECCE.

1.5. For universal access to ECCE, Anganwadi Centres will be strengthened with high-quality
infrastructure, play equipment, and well-trained Anganwadi workers/teachers. Every Anganwadi will
have a well-ventilated, well-designed, child-friendly and well-constructed building with an enriched
learning environment. Children in Anganwadi Centres shall take activity-filled tours - and meet the
teachers and students of their local primary schools, in order to make the transition from Anganwadi
Centres to primary schools a smooth one. Anganwadis shall be fully integrated into school
complexes/clusters, and Anganwadi children, parents, and teachers will be invited to attend and
participate in school/school complex programmes and vice versa.

1.6. It is envisaged that prior to the age of 5 every child will move to a “Preparatory Class”
or “Balavatika” (that is, before Class 1), which has an ECCE-qualified teacher. The learning
in the Preparatory Class shall be based primarily on play-based learning with a focus on
developing cognitive, affective, and psychomotor abilities and early literacy and numeracy. The mid-
day meal programme shall also be extended to the Preparatory Classes in primary schools. Health
check-ups and growth monitoring that are available in the Anganwadi system shall also be made
available to Preparatory Class students of Anganwadi as well as of primary schools.

1.7. To prepare an initial cadre of high-quality ECCE teachers in Anganwadis, current Anganwadi
workers/teachers will be trained through a systematic effort in accordance with the
curricular/pedagogical framework developed by NCERT. Anganwadi workers/teachers with
qualifications of 10+2 and above shall be given a 6-month certificate programme in ECCE; and those
with lower educational qualifications shall be given a one-year diploma programme covering early
literacy, numeracy, and other relevant aspects of ECCE. These programmes may be run through
digital/distance mode using DTH channels as well as smartphones, allowing teachers to acquire
ECCE qualifications with minimal disruption to their current work. The ECCE training of Anganwadi
workers/teachers will be mentored by the Cluster Resource Centres of the School Education
Department which shall hold at least one monthly contact class for continuous assessment. In the
longer term, State Governments shall prepare cadres of professionally qualified educators for early
childhood care and education, through stage-specific professional training, mentoring mechanisms,
and career mapping. Necessary facilities will also be created for the initial professional preparation of
these educators and their Continuous Professional Development (CPD).

1.8. ECCE will also be introduced in Ashramshalas in tribal-dominated areas and in all formats of
alternative schooling in a phased manner. The process for integration and implementation of ECCE
in Ashramshalas and alternative schooling will be similar to that detailed above.

1.9. The responsibility for ECCE curriculum and pedagogy will lie with MHRD to ensure its
continuity from pre-primary school through primary school, and to ensure due attention to the
foundational aspects of education. The planning and implementation of early childhood care and
education curriculum will be carried out jointly by the Ministries of HRD, Women and Child
Development (WCD), Health and Family Welfare (HFW), and Tribal Affairs. A special joint task
force will be constituted for continuous guidance of the smooth integration of early childhood care
and education into school education.


2. Foundational Literacy and Numeracy: An Urgent & Necessary Prerequisite to Learning

2.1. The ability to read and write, and perform basic operations with numbers, is a necessary
foundation and an indispensable prerequisite for all future schooling and lifelong learning. However,
various governmental, as well as non-governmental surveys, indicate that we are currently in a
learning crisis: a large proportion of students currently in elementary school - estimated to be over 5
crore in number - have not attained foundational literacy and numeracy, i.e., the ability to read and
comprehend basic text and the ability to carry out basic addition and subtraction with Indian
numerals.

2.2. Attaining foundational literacy and numeracy for all children will thus become an urgent
national mission, with immediate measures to be taken on many fronts and with clear goals that
will be attained in the short term (including that every student will attain foundational literacy
and numeracy by Grade 3). The highest priority of the education system will be to achieve
universal foundational literacy and numeracy in primary school by 2025. The rest of this Policy
will become relevant for our students only if this most basic learning requirement (i.e., reading,
writing, and arithmetic at the foundational level) is first achieved. To this end, a National
Mission on Foundational Literacy and Numeracy will be set up by the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (MHRD) on priority. Accordingly, all State/UT governments will
immediately prepare an implementation plan for attaining universal foundational literacy and
numeracy in all primary schools, identifying stage-wise targets and goals to be achieved by 2025, and
closely tracking and monitoring progress of the same.

2.3. First, teacher vacancies will be filled at the earliest, in a time-bound manner - especially in
disadvantaged areas and areas with large pupil-to-teacher ratios or high rates of illiteracy. Special
attention will be given to employing local teachers or those with familiarity with local languages. A
pupil-teacher ratio (PTR) of under 30:1 will be ensured at the level of each school; areas having large
numbers of socio-economically disadvantaged students will aim for a PTR of under 25:1. Teachers
will be trained, encouraged, and supported - with continuous professional development - to impart
foundational literacy and numeracy.

2.4. On the curricular side, there will be an increased focus on foundational literacy and numeracy -
and generally, on reading, writing, speaking, counting, arithmetic, and mathematical thinking -
throughout the preparatory and middle school curriculum, with a robust system of continuous
formative/adaptive assessment to track and thereby individualize and ensure each student's learning.
Specific hours daily - and regular events over the year-on activities involving these subjects will be
dedicated to encourage and enthuse students. Teacher education and the early grade curriculum will
be redesigned to have a renewed emphasis on foundational literacy and numeracy.

2.5. Currently, with the lack of universal access to ECCE, a large proportion of children already fall
behind within the first few weeks of Grade 1. Thus, to ensure that all students are school ready, an
interim 3-month play-based ‘school preparation module’ for all Grade 1 students, consisting of
activities and workbooks around the learning of alphabets, sounds, words, colours, shapes, and
numbers, and involving collaborations with peers and parents, will be developed by NCERT and
SCERTs.

2.6. A national repository of high-quality resources on foundational literacy and numeracy will be
made available on the Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing (DIKSHA). Technological
interventions to serve as aids to teachers and to help bridge any language barriers that may exist
between teachers and students, will be piloted and implemented.

2.7. Due to the scale of the current learning crisis, all viable methods will be explored to support
teachers in the mission of attaining universal foundational literacy and numeracy. Studies around the
world show one-on-one peer tutoring to be extremely effective for learning not just for the learner,
but also for the tutor. Thus, peer tutoring can be taken up as a voluntary and joyful activity for fellow
students under the supervision of trained teachers and by taking due care of safety aspects.
Additionally, it will also be made far easier for trained volunteers - from both the local community
and beyond - to participate in this large-scale mission. Every literate member of the community
could commit to teaching one student/person how to read, it would change the country’s landscape
very quickly. States may consider establishing innovative models to foster such peer-tutoring and
volunteer activities, as well as launch other programmes to support learners, in this nationwide
mission to promote foundational literacy and numeracy.

2.8. Enjoyable and inspirational books for students at all levels will be developed, including through
high-quality translation (technology assisted as needed) in all local and Indian languages, and will be
made available extensively in both school and local public libraries. Public and school libraries will
be significantly expanded to build a culture of reading across the country. Digital libraries will also
be established. School libraries will be set up - particularly in villages - to serve the community
during non-school hours, and book clubs may meet in public/school libraries to further facilitate and
promote widespread reading. A National Book Promotion Policy will be formulated, and extensive
initiatives will be undertaken to ensure the availability, accessibility, quality, and readership of books
across geographies, languages, levels, and genres.

2.9. Children are unable to learn optimally when they are undernourished or unwell. Hence, the
nutrition and health (including mental health) of children will be addressed, through healthy meals
and the introduction of well-trained social workers, counsellors, and community involvement into the
schooling system. Furthermore, research shows that the morning hours after a nutritious breakfast can
be particularly productive for the study of cognitively more demanding subjects and hence these
hours may be leveraged by providing a simple but energizing breakfast in addition to midday meals.
In locations where hot meals are not possible, a simple but nutritious meal, e.g., groundnuts/chana
mixed with jaggery and/or local fruits may be provided. All school children shall undergo regular
health check-ups especially for 100% immunization in schools and health cards will be issued to
monitor the same.


3. Curtailing Dropout Rates and Ensuring Universal Access to Education at All Levels

3.1. One of the primary goals of the schooling system must be to ensure that children are enrolled in
and are attending school. Through initiatives such as the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (now the Samagra
Shiksha) and the Right to Education Act, India has made remarkable strides in recent years in
attaining near-universal enrolment in elementary education. However, the data for later grades
indicates some serious issues in retaining children in the schooling system. The GER for Grades 6-8
was 90.9%, while for Grades 9-10 and 11-12 it was only 79.3% and 56.5%, respectively - indicating
that a significant proportion of enrolled students drop out after Grade 5 and especially after Grade 8.
As per the 75th round household survey by NSSO in 2017-18, the number of out of school children in
the age group of 6 to 17 years is 3.22 crore. It will be a top priority to bring these children back into
the educational fold as early as possible, and to prevent further students from dropping out, with a
goal to achieve 100% Gross Enrolment Ratio in preschool to secondary level by 2030. A concerted
national effort will be made to ensure universal access and afford opportunity to all children of the
country to obtain quality holistic education–including vocational education - from pre-school to
Grade 12.

3.2. There are two overall initiatives that will be undertaken to bring children who have dropped out
back to school and to prevent further children from dropping out. The first is to provide effective and
sufficient infrastructure so that all students have access to safe and engaging school education at all
levels from pre-primary school to Grade 12. Besides providing regular trained teachers at each stage,
special care shall be taken to ensure that no school remains deficient on infrastructure support. The
credibility of Government schools shall be re-established and this will be attained by upgrading and
enlarging the schools that already exist, building additional quality schools in areas where they do not
exist, and providing safe and practical conveyances and/or hostels, especially for the girl children, so
that all children have the opportunity to attend a quality school and learn at the appropriate level.
Alternative and innovative education centres will be put in place in cooperation with civil society to
ensure that children of migrant labourers, and other children who are dropping out of school due to
various circumstances are brought back into mainstream education.

3.3. The second is to achieve universal participation in school by carefully tracking students, as well
as their learning levels, in order to ensure that they (a) are enrolled in and attending school, and (b)
have suitable opportunities to catch up and re-enter school in case they have fallen behind or dropped
out. For providing equitable and quality education from the Foundational Stage through Grade 12 to
all children up to the age of 18, suitable facilitating systems shall be put in place. Counsellors or well-
trained social workers connected to schools/school complexes and teachers will continuously work
with students and their parents and will travel through and engage with communities to ensure that all
school-age children are attending and learning in school. Trained and qualified social workers from
civil society organizations/departments of Social Justice and Empowerment and government
functionaries dealing with empowerment of Persons with Disabilities at the State and district level,
could be connected to schools, through various innovative mechanisms adopted by State/UT
Governments, to help in carrying out this important work.

3.4. Once infrastructure and participation are in place, ensuring quality will be the key in retention of
students, so that they (particularly, girls and students from other socio-economically disadvantaged
groups) do not lose interest in attending school. This will require a system of incentives for deploying
teachers with knowledge of the local language to areas with high dropout rates, as well as
overhauling the curriculum to make it more engaging and useful.

3.5. To facilitate learning for all students, with special emphasis on Socio-Economically
Disadvantaged Groups (SEDGs), the scope of school education will be broadened to facilitate
multiple pathways to learning involving both formal and non-formal education modes. Open and
Distance Learning (ODL) Programmes offered by the National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS)
and State Open Schools will be expanded and strengthened for meeting the learning needs of young
people in India who are not able to attend a physical school. NIOS and State Open Schools will offer
the following programmes in addition to the present programmes: A, B and C levels that are
equivalent to Grades 3, 5, and 8 of the formal school system; secondary education programmes that
are equivalent to Grades 10 and 12; vocational education courses/programmes; and adult literacy and
life-enrichment programmes. States will be encouraged to develop these offerings in regional
languages by establishing new/strengthening existing State Institutes of Open Schooling (SIOS).

3.6. To make it easier for both governments as well as non-governmental philanthropic organizations
to build schools, to encourage local variations on account of culture, geography, and demographics,
and to allow alternative models of education, the requirements for schools will be made less
restrictive. The focus will be to have less emphasis on input and greater emphasis on output potential
concerning desired learning outcomes. Regulations on inputs will be limited to certain areas as
enumerated in Chapter 8. Other models for schools will also be piloted, such as public-philanthropic
partnerships.

3.7. Efforts will be made to involve community and alumni in volunteer efforts for enhancing
learning by providing at schools: one-on-one tutoring; the teaching of literacy and holding of extra-
help sessions; teaching support and guidance for educators; career guidance and mentoring to
students; etc. In this regard, the support of active and healthy senior citizens, school alumni and
local community members will be suitably garnered. Databases of literate volunteers, retired
scientists/government/semi government employees, alumni, and educators will be created for this
purpose.


4. Curriculum and Pedagogy in Schools: Learning Should be Holistic, Integrated Enjoyable, and Engaging

Restructuring school curriculum and pedagogy in a new 5+3+3+4 design
4.1. The curricular and pedagogical structure of school education will be reconfigured to make it
responsive and relevant to the developmental needs and interests of learners at different stages of
their development, corresponding to the age ranges of 3-8, 8-11, 11-14, and 14-18 years, respectively.
The curricular and pedagogical structure and the curricular framework for school education will
therefore be guided by a 5+3+3+4 design, consisting of the Foundational Stage (in two parts, that is,
3 years of Anganwadi/pre-school + 2 years in primary school in Grades 1-2; both together covering
ages 3-8), Preparatory Stage (Grades 3-5, covering ages 8-11), Middle Stage (Grades 6-8, covering
ages 11-14), and Secondary Stage (Grades 9-12 in two phases, i.e., 9 and 10 in the first and 11 and
12 in the second, covering ages 14-18).

4.2. The Foundational Stage will consist of five years of flexible, multilevel, play/activity-based
learning and the curriculum and pedagogy of ECCE as mentioned in para 1.2. The Preparatory Stage
will comprise three years of education building on the play, discovery, and activity-based
pedagogical and curricular style of the Foundational Stage, and will also begin to incorporate some
light text books as well as aspects of more formal but interactive classroom learning, in order to lay a
solid groundwork across subjects, including reading, writing, speaking, physical education, art,
languages, science, and mathematics. The Middle Stage will comprise three years of education,
building on the pedagogical and curricular style of the Preparatory Stage, but with the introduction
of subject teachers for learning and discussion of the more abstract concepts in each subject that
students will be ready for at this stage across the sciences, mathematics, arts, social sciences, and
humanities. Experiential learning within each subject, and explorations of relations among different
subjects, will be encouraged and emphasized despite the introduction of more specialized subjects
and subject teachers. The Secondary Stage will comprise of four years of multidisciplinary study,
building on the subject-oriented pedagogical and curricular style of the Middle Stage, but with greater
depth, greater critical thinking, greater attention to life aspirations, and greater flexibility and student
choice of subjects. In particular students would continue to have the option of exiting after Grade 10
and re-entering in the next phase to pursue vocational or any other courses available in Grades 11-
12, including at a more specialized school, if so desired.

4.3. The above-described stages are purely curricular and pedagogical, designed to optimize learning
for students based on the cognitive development of children; they will inform the development of
National and State curricula and teaching-learning strategies at each stage, but parallel changes to
physical infrastructure will not be required.
Holistic development of learners

4.4. The key overall thrust of curriculum and pedagogy reform across all stages will be to move the
education system towards real understanding and towards learning how to learn - and away from the
culture of rote learning as is largely present today. The aim of education will not only be cognitive
development, but also building character and creating holistic and well-rounded individuals equipped
with the key 21st century skills. Ultimately, knowledge is a deep-seated treasure and education helps
in its manifestation as the perfection which is already within an individual. All aspects of curriculum
and pedagogy will be reoriented and revamped to attain these critical goals. Specific sets of skills and
values across domains will be identified for integration and incorporation at each stage of learning,
from pre-school to higher education. Curriculum frameworks and transaction mechanisms will be
developed for ensuring that these skills and values are imbibed through engaging processes of
teaching and learning. NCERT will identify these required skill sets and include mechanisms for their
transaction in the National Curriculum Framework for early childhood and school education.
Reduce curriculum content to enhance essential learning and critical thinking

4.5. Curriculum content will be reduced in each subject to its core essentials, to make space for
critical thinking and more holistic, inquiry-based, discovery-based, discussion-based, and analysis-
based learning. The mandated content will focus on key concepts, ideas, applications, and problem-
solving. Teaching and learning will be conducted in a more interactive manner; questions will be
encouraged, and classroom sessions will regularly contain more fun, creative, collaborative, and
exploratory activities for students for deeper and more experiential learning.

Experiential learning
4.6. In all stages, experiential learning will be adopted, including hands-on learning, arts-integrated
and sports-integrated education, story-telling-based pedagogy, among others, as standard pedagogy
within each subject, and with explorations of relations among different subjects. To close the gap in
achievement of learning outcomes, classroom transactions will shift, towards competency-based
learning and education. The assessment tools (including assessment “as”, “of”, and “for” learning)
will also be aligned with the learning outcomes, capabilities, and dispositions as specified for each
subject of a given class.

4.7. Art-integration is a cross-curricular pedagogical approach that utilizes various aspects and forms
of art and culture as the basis for learning of concepts across subjects. As a part of the thrust on
experiential learning, art-integrated education will be embedded in classroom transactions not only
for creating joyful classrooms, but also for imbibing the Indian ethos through integration of Indian art
and culture in the teaching and learning process at every level. This art-integrated approach will
strengthen the linkages between education and culture.

4.8. Sports-integration is another cross-curricular pedagogical approach that utilizes physical
activities including indigenous sports, in pedagogical practices to help in developing skills such as
collaboration, self-initiative, self-direction, self-discipline, teamwork, responsibility, citizenship, etc.
Sports-integrated learning will be undertaken in classroom transactions to help students adopt fitness
as a lifelong attitude and to achieve the related life skills along with the levels of fitness as envisaged
in the Fit India Movement. The need to integrate sports in education is well recognized as it serves to
foster holistic development by promoting physical and psychological well-being while also
enhancing cognitive abilities.

Empower students through flexibility in course choices
4.9. Students will be given increased flexibility and choice of subjects to study, particularly in
secondary school - including subjects in physical education, the arts and crafts, and vocational skills
– so that they can design their own paths of study and life plans. Holistic development and a wide
choice of subjects and courses year to year will be the new distinguishing feature of secondary school
education. There will be no hard separation among ‘curricular’, ‘extracurricular’, or ‘co-curricular’,
among ‘arts’, ‘humanities’, and ‘sciences’, or between ‘vocational’ or ‘academic’ streams. Subjects
such as physical education, the arts and crafts, and vocational skills, in addition to science,
humanities, and mathematics, will be incorporated throughout the school curriculum, with a
consideration for what is interesting and safe at each age.

4.10. Each of the four stages of school education, in accordance with what may be possible in
different regions, may consider moving towards a semester or any other system that allows the
inclusion of shorter modules, or courses that are taught on alternate days, in order to allow an
exposure to more subjects and enable greater flexibility. States may look into innovative methods to
achieve these aims of greater flexibility and exposure to and enjoyment of a wider range of subjects,
including across the arts, sciences, humanities, languages, sports, and vocational subjects.
Multilingualism and the power of language

4.11. It is well understood that young children learn and grasp nontrivial concepts more quickly in
their home language/mother tongue. Home language is usually the same language as the mother
tongue or that which is spoken by local communities. However, at times in multi-lingual families,
there can be a home language spoken by other family members which may sometimes be different
from mother tongue or local language. Wherever possible, the medium of instruction until at least
Grade 5, but preferably till Grade 8 and beyond, will be the home language/mother tongue/local
language/regional language. Thereafter, the home/local language shall continue to be taught as a
language wherever possible. This will be followed by both public and private schools. High-quality
textbooks, including in science, will be made available in home languages/mother tongue. All efforts
will be made early on to ensure that any gaps that exist between the language spoken by the child and
the medium of teaching are bridged. In cases where home language/mother tongue textbook material
is not available, the language of transaction between teachers and students will still remain the home
language/mother tongue wherever possible. Teachers will be encouraged to use a bilingual approach,
including bilingual teaching-learning materials, with those students whose home language may be
different from the medium of instruction. All languages will be taught with high quality to all
students; a language does not need to be the medium of instruction for it to be taught and learned
well.

4.12. As research clearly shows that children pick up languages extremely quickly between the ages
of 2 and 8 and that multilingualism has great cognitive benefits to young students, children will be
exposed to different languages early on (but with a particular emphasis on the mother tongue),
starting from the Foundational Stage onwards. All languages will be taught in an enjoyable and
interactive style, with plenty of interactive conversation, and with early reading and subsequently
writing in the mother tongue in the early years, and with skills developed for reading and writing in
other languages in Grade 3 and beyond. There will be a major effort from both the Central and State
governments to invest in large numbers of language teachers in all regional languages around the
country, and, in particular, for all languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of
India. States, especially States from different regions of India, may enter into bilateral agreements to
hire teachers in large numbers from each other, to satisfy the three-language formula in their
respective States, and also to encourage the study of Indian languages across the country. Extensive
use of technology will be made for teaching and learning of different languages and to popularize
language learning.

4.13. The three-language formula will continue to be implemented while keeping in mind the
Constitutional provisions, aspirations of the people, regions, and the Union, and the need to promote
multilingualism as well as promote national unity. However, there will be a greater flexibility in the
three-language formula, and no language will be imposed on any State. The three languages learned
by children will be the choices of States, regions, and of course the students themselves, so long as at
least two of the three languages are native to India. In particular, students who wish to change one or
more of the three languages they are studying may do so in Grade 6 or 7, as long as they are able to
demonstrate basic proficiency in three languages (including one language of India at the literature
level) by the end of secondary school.

4.14. All efforts will be made in preparing high-quality bilingual textbooks and teaching-learning
materials for science and mathematics, so that students are enabled to think and speak about the two
subjects both in their home language/mother tongue and in English.

4.15. As so many developed countries around the world have amply demonstrated, being well
educated in one’s language, culture, and traditions is not a detriment but indeed a huge benefit to
educational, social, and technological advancement. India’s languages are among the richest, most
scientific, most beautiful, and most expressive in the world, with a huge body of ancient as well as
modern literature (both prose and poetry), film, and music written in these languages that help form
India’s national identity and wealth. For purposes of cultural enrichment as well as national
integration, all young Indians should be aware of the rich and vast array of languages of their country,
and the treasures that they and their literatures contain.

4.16. Thus, every student in the country will participate in a fun project/activity on ‘The Languages
of India’, sometime in Grades 6-8, such as, under the ‘Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat’ initiative. In this
project/activity, students will learn about the remarkable unity of most of the major Indian languages,
starting with their common phonetic and scientifically-arranged alphabets and scripts, their common
grammatical structures, their origins and sources of vocabularies from Sanskrit and other classical
languages, as well as their rich inter-influences and differences. They will also learn what
geographical areas speak which languages, get a sense of the nature and structure of tribal languages,
and learn to say commonly spoken phrases and sentences in every major language of India and also
learn a bit about the rich and uplifting literature of each (through suitable translations as necessary).
Such an activity would give them both a sense of the unity and the beautiful cultural heritage and
diversity of India and would be a wonderful icebreaker their whole lives as they meet people from
other parts of India. This project/activity would be a joyful activity and would not involve any form
of assessment.

4.17. The importance, relevance, and beauty of the classical languages and literature of India also
cannot be overlooked. Sanskrit, while also an important modern language mentioned in the Eighth
Schedule of the Constitution of India, possesses a classical literature that is greater in volume than
that of Latin and Greek put together, containing vast treasures of mathematics, philosophy, grammar,
music, politics, medicine, architecture, metallurgy, drama, poetry, storytelling, and more (known as
‘Sanskrit Knowledge Systems’), written by people of various religions as well as non-religious
people, and by people from all walks of life and a wide range of socio-economic backgrounds over
thousands of years. Sanskrit will thus be offered at all levels of school and higher education as an
important, enriching option for students, including as an option in the three-language formula. It will
be taught in ways that are interesting and experiential as well as contemporarily relevant, including
through the use of Sanskrit Knowledge Systems, and in particular through phonetics and
pronunciation. Sanskrit textbooks at the foundational and middle school level may be written in
Simple Standard Sanskrit (SSS) to teach Sanskrit through Sanskrit (STS) and make its study truly
enjoyable.

4.18. India also has an extremely rich literature in other classical languages, including classical
Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, Odia. In addition to these classical languages Pali, Persian, and
Prakrit; and their works of literature too must be preserved for their richness and for the pleasure and
enrichment of posterity. As India becomes a fully developed country, the next generation will want to
partake in and be enriched by India’s extensive and beautiful classical literature. In addition to
Sanskrit, other classical languages and literatures of India, including Tamil, Telugu, Kannada,
Malayalam, Odia, Pali, Persian, and Prakrit, will also be widely available in schools as options for
students, possibly as online modules, through experiential and innovative approaches, to ensure that
these languages and literature stay alive and vibrant. Similar efforts will be made for all Indian
languages having rich oral and written literatures, cultural traditions, and knowledge.

4.19. For the enrichment of the children, and for the preservation of these rich languages and their
artistic treasures, all students in all schools, public or private, will have the option of learning at least
two years of a classical language of India and its associated literature, through experiential and
innovative approaches, including the integration of technology, in Grades 6-12, with the option to
continue from the middle stage through the secondary stage and beyond.

4.20. In addition to high quality offerings in Indian languages and English, foreign languages, such as
Korean, Japanese, Thai, French, German, Spanish, Portuguese, and Russian, will also be offered at
the secondary level, for students to learn about the cultures of the world and to enrich their global
knowledge and mobility according to their own interests and aspirations.

4.21. The teaching of all languages will be enhanced through innovative and experiential methods,
including through gamification and apps, by weaving in the cultural aspects of the languages - such
as films, theatre, storytelling, poetry, and music - and by drawing connections with various relevant
subjects and with real-life experiences. Thus, the teaching of languages will also be based on
experiential-learning pedagogy.

4.22. Indian Sign Language (ISL) will be standardized across the country, and National and State
curriculum materials developed, for use by students with hearing impairment. Local sign languages
will be respected and taught as well, where possible and relevant.

Curricular Integration of Essential Subjects, Skills, and Capacities
4.23. While students must have a large amount of flexibility in choosing their individual curricula,
certain subjects, skills, and capacities should be learned by all students to become good, successful,
innovative, adaptable, and productive human beings in today’s rapidly changing world. In addition to
proficiency in languages, these skills include: scientific temper and evidence-based thinking;
creativity and innovativeness; sense of aesthetics and art; oral and written communication; health and
nutrition; physical education, fitness, wellness, and sports; collaboration and teamwork; problem
solving and logical reasoning; vocational exposure and skills; digital literacy, coding, and
computational thinking; ethical and moral reasoning; knowledge and practice of human and
Constitutional values; gender sensitivity; Fundamental Duties; citizenship skills and values;
knowledge of India; environmental awareness including water and resource conservation, sanitation
and hygiene; and current affairs and knowledge of critical issues facing local communities, States, the
country, and the world.

4.24. Concerted curricular and pedagogical initiatives, including the introduction of contemporary
subjects such as Artificial Intelligence, Design Thinking, Holistic Health, Organic Living,
Environmental Education, Global Citizenship Education (GCED), etc. at relevant stages will be
undertaken to develop these various important skills in students at all levels.

4.25. It is recognized that mathematics and mathematical thinking will be very important for India’s
future and India’s leadership role in the numerous upcoming fields and professions that will involve
artificial intelligence, machine learning, and data science, etc. Thus, mathematics and computational
thinking will be given increased emphasis throughout the school years, starting with the foundational
stage, through a variety of innovative methods, including the regular use of puzzles and games that
make mathematical thinking more enjoyable and engaging. Activities involving coding will be
introduced in Middle Stage.

4.26. Every student will take a fun course, during Grades 6-8, that gives a survey and hands-on
experience of a sampling of important vocational crafts, such as carpentry, electric work, metal work,
gardening, pottery making, etc., as decided by States and local communities and as mapped by local
skilling needs. A practice-based curriculum for Grades 6-8 will be appropriately designed by NCERT
while framing the NCFSE 2020-21. All students will participate in a 10-day bagless period sometime
during Grades 6-8 where they intern with local vocational experts such as carpenters, gardeners,
potters, artists, etc. Similar internship opportunities to learn vocational subjects may be made
available to students throughout Grades 6-12, including holiday periods. Vocational courses through
online mode will also be made available. Bagless days will be encouraged throughout the year for
various types of enrichment activities involving arts, quizzes, sports, and vocational crafts. Children
will be given periodic exposure to activities outside school through visits to places/monuments of
historical, cultural and tourist importance, meeting local artists and craftsmen and visits higher
educational institutions in their village/Tehsil/District/State.

4.27. “Knowledge of India” will include knowledge from ancient India and its contributions to
modern India and its successes and challenges, and a clear sense of India’s future aspirations with
regard to education, health, environment, etc. These elements will be incorporated in an accurate and
scientific manner throughout the school curriculum wherever relevant; in particular, Indian
Knowledge Systems, including tribal knowledge and indigenous and traditional ways of learning, will
be covered and included in mathematics, astronomy, philosophy, yoga, architecture, medicine,
agriculture, engineering, linguistics, literature, sports, games, as well as in governance, polity,
conservation. Specific courses in tribal ethno-medicinal practices, forest management, traditional
(organic) crop cultivation, natural farming, etc. will also be made available. An engaging course on
Indian Knowledge Systems will also be available to students in secondary school as an elective.
Competitions may be held in schools for learning various topics and subjects through fun and
indigenous games. Video documentaries on inspirational luminaries of India, ancient and modern, in
science and beyond, will be shown at appropriate points throughout the school curriculum. Students
will be encouraged to visit different States as part of cultural exchange programmes.

4.28. Students will be taught at a young age the importance of “doing what's right”, and will be given
a logical framework for making ethical decisions. In later years, this would then be expanded along
themes of cheating, violence, plagiarism, littering, tolerance, equality, empathy, etc., with a view to
enabling children to embrace moral/ethical values in conducting one's life, formulate a
position/argument about an ethical issue from multiple perspectives, and use ethical practices in all
work. As consequences of such basic ethical reasoning, traditional Indian values and all basic human
and Constitutional values (such as seva, ahimsa, swachchhata, satya, nishkam karma, shanti,
sacrifice, tolerance, diversity, pluralism, righteous conduct, gender sensitivity, respect for elders,
respect for all people and their inherent capabilities regardless of background, respect for
environment, helpfulness, courtesy, patience, forgiveness, empathy, compassion, patriotism,
democratic outlook, integrity, responsibility, justice, liberty, equality, and fraternity) will be
developed in all students. Children will have the opportunity to read and learn from the original
stories of the Panchatantra, Jataka, Hitopadesh, and other fun fables and inspiring tales from the
Indian tradition and learn about their influences on global literature. Excerpts from the Indian
Constitution will also be considered essential reading for all students. Basic training in health,
including preventive health, mental health, good nutrition, personal and public hygiene, disaster
response and first-aid will also be included in the curriculum, as well as scientific explanations of the
detrimental and damaging effects of alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs.

4.29. All curriculum and pedagogy, from the foundational stage onwards, will be redesigned to be
strongly rooted in the Indian and local context and ethos in terms of culture, traditions, heritage,
customs, language, philosophy, geography, ancient and contemporary knowledge, societal and
scientific needs, indigenous and traditional ways of learning etc. – in order to ensure that education is
maximally relatable, relevant, interesting, and effective for our students. Stories, arts, games, sports,
examples, problems, etc. will be chosen as much as possible to be rooted in the Indian and local
geographic context. Ideas, abstractions, and creativity will indeed best flourish when learning is thus
rooted.

National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCFSE)
4.30. The formulation of a new and comprehensive National Curricular Framework for School
Education, NCFSE 2020-21, will be undertaken by the NCERT - based on the principles of this
National Education Policy 2020, frontline curriculum needs, and after discussions with all
stakeholders including State Governments, Ministries, relevant Departments of the Central
Government, and other expert bodies, and will be made available in all regional languages. The
NCFSE document shall henceforth be revisited and updated once every 5-10 years, taking into
account frontline curriculum.

National Textbooks with Local Content and Flavour
4.31. The reduction in content and increased flexibility of school curriculum - and the renewed
emphasis on constructive rather than rote learning - must be accompanied by parallel changes in
school textbooks. All textbooks shall aim to contain the essential core material (together with
discussion, analysis, examples, and applications) deemed important on a national level, but at the
same time contain any desired nuances and supplementary material as per local contexts and needs.
Where possible, schools and teachers will also have choices in the textbooks they employ - from
among a set of textbooks that contain the requisite national and local material - so that they may teach
in a manner that is best suited to their own pedagogical styles as well as to their students and
communities’ needs.

4.32. The aim will be to provide such quality textbooks at the lowest possible cost -namely, at the
cost of production/printing - in order to mitigate the burden of textbook prices on the students and on
the educational system. This may be accomplished by using high-quality textbook materials
developed by NCERT in conjunction with the SCERTs; additional textbook materials could be
funded by public-philanthropic partnerships and crowd sourcing that incentivize experts to write such
high-quality textbooks at cost price. States will prepare their own curricula (which may be based on
the NCFSE prepared by NCERT to the extent possible) and prepare textbooks (which may be based
on the NCERT textbook materials to the extent possible), incorporating State flavour and material as
needed. While doing so, it must be borne in mind that NCERT curriculum would be taken as the
nationally acceptable criterion. The availability of such textbooks in all regional languages will be a
top priority so that all students have access to high-quality learning. All efforts will be made to ensure
timely availability of textbooks in schools. Access to downloadable and printable versions of all
textbooks will be provided by all States/UTs and NCERT to help conserve the environment and
reduce the logistical burden.

4.33. Concerted efforts, through suitable changes in curriculum and pedagogy, will be made by
NCERT, SCERTs, schools, and educators to significantly reduce the weight of school bags and
textbooks.

Transforming Assessment for Student Development
4.34. The aim of assessment in the culture of our schooling system will shift from one that is
summative and primarily tests rote memorization skills to one that is more regular and formative, is
more competency-based, promotes learning and development for our students, and tests higher-order
skills, such as analysis, critical thinking, and conceptual clarity. The primary purpose of assessment
will indeed be for learning; it will help the teacher and student, and the entire schooling system,
continuously revise teaching-learning processes to optimize learning and development for all
students. This will be the underlying principle for assessment at all levels of education.

4.35. The progress card of all students for school-based assessment, which is communicated by
schools to parents, will be completely redesigned by States/UTs under guidance from the proposed
National Assessment Centre, NCERT, and SCERTs. The progress card will be a holistic, 360-degree,
multidimensional report that reflects in great detail the progress as well as the uniqueness of each
learner in the cognitive, affective, and psychomotor domains. It will include self-assessment and peer
assessment, and progress of the child in project-based and inquiry-based learning, quizzes, role plays,
group work, portfolios, etc., along with teacher assessment. The holistic progress card will form an
important link between home and school and will be accompanied by parent-teacher meetings in
order to actively involve parents in their children’s holistic education and development. The progress
card would also provide teachers and parents with valuable information on how to support each
student in and out of the classroom. AI-based software could be developed and used by students to
help track their growth through their school years based on learning data and interactive
questionnaires for parents, students, and teachers, in order to provide students with valuable
information on their strengths, areas of interest, and needed areas of focus, and to thereby help them
make optimal career choices.

4.36. The current nature of secondary school exams, including Board exams and entrance exams -
and the resulting coaching culture of today - are doing much harm, especially at the secondary school
level, replacing valuable time for true learning with excessive exam coaching and preparation. These
exams also force students to learn a very narrow band of material in a single stream, rather than
allowing the flexibility and choice that will be so important in the education system of the future.

4.37. While the Board exams for Grades 10 and 12 will be continued, the existing system of Board
and entrance examinations shall be reformed to eliminate the need for undertaking coaching classes.
To reverse these harmful effects of the current assessment system, Board exams will be redesigned to
encourage holistic development; students will be able to choose many of the subjects in which they
take Board exams, depending on their individualized interests. Board exams will also be made
‘easier’, in the sense that they will test primarily core capacities/competencies rather than months of
coaching and memorization; any student who has been going to and making a basic effort in a school
class will be able to pass and do well in the corresponding subject Board Exam without much
additional effort. To further eliminate the ‘high stakes’ aspect of Board Exams, all students will be
allowed to take Board Exams on up to two occasions during any given school year, one main
examination and one for improvement, if desired.

4.38. In addition to introducing greater flexibility, student choice, and best-of-two attempts,
assessments that primarily test core capacities must be the immediate key reforms to all Board exams.
Boards may over time also develop further viable models of Board Exams that reduce pressure and
the coaching culture. Some possibilities include: a system of annual/semester/modular Board Exams
could be developed - that each test far less material, and are taken immediately after the
corresponding course is taken in school - so that the pressure from exams is better distributed, less
intense, and less high-stakes across the Secondary Stage; all subjects and corresponding assessments,
beginning with mathematics, could be offered at two levels, with students doing some of their
subjects at the standard level and some at a higher level; and Board exams in certain subjects could be
redesigned to have two parts – one part of an objective type with multiple-choice questions and the
other of a descriptive type.

4.39. With regard to all of the above, guidelines will be prepared by NCERT, in consultation with
major stakeholders, such as SCERTs, Boards of Assessment (BoAs), the proposed new National
Assessment Centre etc., and teachers prepared, for a transformation in the assessment system by the
2022-23 academic session, to align with the NCFSE 2020-21.

4.40. To track progress throughout the school years, and not just at the end of Grades 10 and 12 - for
the benefit of students, parents, teachers, principals, and the entire schooling system in planning
improvements to schools and teaching-learning processes - all students will take school examinations
in Grades 3, 5, and 8 which will be conducted by the appropriate authority. These examinations
would test achievement of basic learning outcomes, through assessment of core concepts and
knowledge from the national and local curricula, along with relevant higher-order skills and
application of knowledge in real-life situations, rather than rote memorization. The Grade 3
examination, in particular, would test basic literacy, numeracy, and other foundational skills. The
results of school examinations will be used only for developmental purposes of the school education
system, including for public disclosure by schools of their overall (anonymized) student outcomes,
and for continuous monitoring and improvement of the schooling system.

4.41. It is proposed to set up a National Assessment Centre, PARAKH (Performance Assessment,
Review, and Analysis of Knowledge for Holistic Development), as a standard-setting body under
MHRD that fulfils the basic objectives of setting norms, standards, and guidelines for student
assessment and evaluation for all recognized school boards of India, guiding the State Achievement
Survey (SAS) and undertaking the National Achievement Survey (NAS), monitoring achievement of
learning outcomes in the country, and encouraging and helping school boards to shift their
assessment patterns towards meeting the skill requirements of the 21
st 
century in consonance with the
stated objectives of this Policy. This Centre will also advise school boards regarding new assessment
patterns and latest researches, promote collaborations between school boards. It will also become an
instrument for the sharing of best practices among school boards, and for ensuring equivalence of
academic standards among learners across all school boards.

4.42. The principles for university entrance exams will be similar. The National Testing Agency
(NTA) will work to offer a high-quality common aptitude test, as well as specialized common subject
exams in the sciences, humanities, languages, arts, and vocational subjects, at least twice every year.
These exams shall test conceptual understanding and the ability to apply knowledge and shall aim to
eliminate the need for taking coaching for these exams. Students will be able to choose the subjects
for taking the test, and each university will be able to see each student’s individual subject portfolio
and admit students into their programmes based on individual interests and talents. The NTA will
serve as a premier, expert, autonomous testing organization to conduct entrance examinations for
undergraduate and graduate admissions and fellowships in higher education institutions. The high
quality, range, and flexibility of the NTA testing services will enable most universities to use these
common entrance exams - rather than having hundreds of universities each devising their own
entrance exams - thereby drastically reducing the burden on students, universities and colleges, and
the entire education system. It will be left up to individual universities and colleges to use NTA
assessments for their admissions.

Support for Gifted Students/Students with Special Talents
4.43. There are innate talents in every student, which must be discovered, nurtured, fostered, and
developed. These talents may express themselves in the form of varying interests, dispositions, and
capacities. Those students that show particularly strong interests and capacities in a given realm must
be encouraged to pursue that realm beyond the general school curriculum. Teacher education will
include methods for the recognition and fostering of such student talents and interests. The NCERT
and NCTE will develop guidelines for the education of gifted children. B.Ed. programmes may also
allow a specialization in the education of gifted children.

4.44. Teachers will aim to encourage students with singular interests and/or talents in the classroom
by giving them supplementary enrichment material and guidance and encouragement. Topic-centered
and Project-based Clubs and Circles will be encouraged and supported at the levels of schools, school
complexes, districts, and beyond. Examples include Science Circles, Math Circles, Music & Dance
Performance Circles, Chess Circles, Poetry Circles, Language Circles, Drama Circles, Debate
Circles, Sports Circles, Eco-Clubs, Health & Well-being Clubs/ Yoga Clubs and so on. Along these
lines, high-quality national residential summer programmes for secondary school students in various
subjects will also be encouraged, with a rigorous merit-based but equitable admission process to
attract the very best students and teachers from across the country including from socio-economically
disadvantaged groups.

4.45. Olympiads and competitions in various subjects will be conducted across the country, with clear
coordination and progression from school to local to state to national levels, to ensure that all students
may participate at all levels for which they qualify. Efforts will be made to make these available in
rural areas and in regional languages to ensure widespread participation. Public and private
universities, including premier institutions like the IITs and NITs, would be encouraged to use merit-
based results from National, and International Olympiads, and results from other relevant national
programmes, as part of the criteria for admissions into their undergraduate programmes.

4.46. Once internet-connected smart phones or tablets are available in all homes and/or schools,
online apps with quizzes, competitions, assessments, enrichment materials, and online communities
for shared interests will be developed, and will work to enhance all the aforementioned initiatives, as
group activities for students with appropriate supervision of parents and teachers. Schools will
develop smart classrooms, in a phased manner, for using digital pedagogy and thereby enriching the
teaching-learning process with online resources and collaborations.


5. Teachers

5.1. Teachers truly shape the future of our children - and, therefore, the future of our nation. It is
because of this noblest role that the teacher in India was the most respected member of society. Only
the very best and most learned became teachers. Society gave teachers, or gurus, what they needed to
pass on their knowledge, skills, and ethics optimally to students. The quality of teacher education,
recruitment, deployment, service conditions, and empowerment of teachers is not where it should be,
and consequently the quality and motivation of teachers does not reach the desired standards. The
high respect for teachers and the high status of the teaching profession must be restored so as to
inspire the best to enter the teaching profession. The motivation and empowerment of teachers is
required to ensure the best possible future for our children and our nation.

Recruitment and Deployment
5.2. To ensure that outstanding students enter the teaching profession - especially from rural areas - a
large number of merit-based scholarships shall be instituted across the country for studying quality 4-
year integrated B.Ed. programmes. In rural areas, special merit-based scholarships will be established
that also include preferential employment in their local areas upon successful completion of their
B.Ed. programmes. Such scholarships will provide local job opportunities to local students, especially
female students, so that these students serve as local-area role models and as highly qualified teachers
who speak the local language. Incentives will be provided for teachers to take up teaching jobs in
rural areas, especially in areas that are currently facing acute shortage of quality teachers. A key
incentive for teaching in rural schools will be the provision of local housing near or on the school
premises or increased housing allowances.

5.3. The harmful practice of excessive teacher transfers will be halted, so that students have
continuity in their role models and educational environments. Transfers will occur in very special
circumstances, as suitably laid down in a structured manner by State/UT governments. Furthermore,
transfers will be conducted through an online computerized system that ensures transparency.

5.4. Teacher Eligibility Tests (TETs) will be strengthened to inculcate better test material, both in
terms of content and pedagogy. The TETs will also be extended to cover teachers across all stages
(Foundational, Preparatory, Middle and Secondary) of school education. For subject teachers,
suitable TET or NTA test scores in the corresponding subjects will also be taken into account for
recruitment. To gauge passion and motivation for teaching, a classroom demonstration or interview
will become an integral part of teacher hiring at schools and school complexes. These interviews
would also be used to assess comfort and proficiency in teaching in the local language, so that every
school/school complex has at least some teachers who can converse with students in the local
language and other prevalent home languages of students. Teachers in private schools also must have
qualified similarly through TET, a demonstration/interview, and knowledge of local language(s).

5.5. To ensure an adequate number of teachers across subjects - particularly in subjects such as art,
physical education, vocational education, and languages - teachers could be recruited to a school or
school complex and the sharing of teachers across schools could be considered in accordance with the
grouping-of-schools adopted by State/UT governments.

5.6. Schools/school complexes will be encouraged to hire local eminent persons or experts as ‘master
instructors’ in various subjects, such as in traditional local arts, vocational crafts, entrepreneurship,
agriculture, or any other subject where local expertise exists, to benefit students and help preserve
and promote local knowledge and professions.

5.7. A technology-based comprehensive teacher-requirement planning forecasting exercise will be
conducted by each State to assess expected subject-wise teacher vacancies over the next two decades.
The above described initiatives in recruitment and deployment will be scaled as needed over time, to
fill all vacancies with qualified teachers, including local teachers, with suitable incentives for career
management and progression as described below. Teacher education programmes and offerings will
also align with the vacancies thus projected.

Service Environment and Culture
5.8. The primary goal of overhauling the service environment and culture of schools will be to
maximize the ability of teachers to do their jobs effectively, and to ensure that they are part of
vibrant, caring, and inclusive communities of teachers, students, parents, principals, and other support
staff, all of whom share a common goal: to ensure that our children are learning.

5.9. The first requirement in this direction will be to ensure decent and pleasant service conditions at
schools. Adequate and safe infrastructure, including working toilets, clean drinking water, clean and
attractive spaces, electricity, computing devices, internet, libraries, and sports and recreational
resources will be provided to all schools to ensure that teachers and students, including children of all
genders and children with disabilities, receive a safe, inclusive, and effective learning environment
and are comfortable and inspired to teach and learn in their schools. In-service training will have
inputs on safety, health and environment at workplace in schools to ensure that all teachers are
sensitized to these requirements.

5.10. State/UT Governments may adopt innovative formats, such as school complex, rationalization
of schools, without in any way reducing accessibility, for effective school governance, resource
sharing, and community building. The creation of school complexes could go a long way towards
building vibrant teacher communities. The hiring of teachers to school complexes could
automatically create relationships among schools across the school complex; it would also help
ensure excellent subject-wise distribution of teachers, creating a more vibrant teacher knowledge
base. Teachers at very small schools will not remain isolated any longer and may become part of and
work with larger school complex communities, sharing best practices with each other and working
collaboratively to ensure that all children are learning. School complexes could also share
counsellors, trained social workers, technical and maintenance staff, etc. to further support teachers
and help create an effective learning environment.

5.11. In collaboration with parents and other key local stakeholders, teachers will also be more
involved in the governance of schools/school complexes, including as members of the School
Management Committees/School Complex Management Committees.

5.12. To prevent the large amounts of time spent currently by teachers on non-teaching activities,
teachers will not be engaged any longer in work that is not directly related to teaching; in particular,
teachers will not be involved in strenuous administrative tasks and more than a rationalized minimum
time for mid-day meal related work, so that they may fully concentrate on their teaching-learning
duties.

5.13. To help ensure that schools have positive learning environments, the role expectations of
principals and teachers will explicitly include developing a caring and inclusive culture at their
schools, for effective learning and the benefit of all stakeholders.

5.14. Teachers will be given more autonomy in choosing aspects of pedagogy, so that they may teach
in the manner they find most effective for the students in their classrooms. Teachers will also focus
on socio-emotional learning - a critical aspect of any student’s holistic development. Teachers will be
recognized for novel approaches to teaching that improve learning outcomes in their classrooms.
Continuous Professional Development (CPD)

5.15. Teachers will be given continuous opportunities for self-improvement and to learn the latest
innovations and advances in their professions. These will be offered in multiple modes, including in
the form of local, regional, state, national, and international workshops as well as online teacher
development modules. Platforms (especially online platforms) will be developed so that teachers may
share ideas and best practices. Each teacher will be expected to participate in at least 50 hours of CPD
opportunities every year for their own professional development, driven by their own interests. CPD
opportunities will, in particular, systematically cover the latest pedagogies regarding foundational
literacy and numeracy, formative and adaptive assessment of learning outcomes, competency-based
learning, and related pedagogies, such as experiential learning, arts-integrated, sports-integrated, and
storytelling-based approaches, etc.

5.16. School Principals and school complex leaders will have similar modular
leadership/management workshops and online development opportunities and platforms to
continuously improve their own leadership and management skills, and so that they too may share
best practices with each other. Such leaders will also be expected to participate in 50 hours or more of
CPD modules per year, covering leadership and management, as well as content and pedagogy with a
focus on preparing and implementing pedagogical plans based on competency-based education.

Career Management and Progression (CMP)
5.17. Teachers doing outstanding work must be recognized and promoted, and given salary raises, to
incentivize all teachers to do their best work. Therefore, a robust merit-based structure of tenure,
promotion, and salary structure will be developed, with multiple levels within each teacher stage, that
incentivizes and recognizes outstanding teachers. A system of multiple parameters for proper
assessment of performance will be developed for the same by State/UT Governments that is based on
peer reviews, attendance, commitment, hours of CPD, and other forms of service to the school and
the community or based on NPST given in Para 5.20. In this Policy, in the context of careers, ‘tenure’
refers to confirmation for permanent employment, after due assessment of performance and
contribution, while ‘tenure track’ refers to the period of probation preceding tenure.

5.18. Further, it will be ensured that career growth (in terms of tenure, promotions, salary increases,
etc.) is available to teachers within a single school stage (i.e., Foundational, Preparatory, Middle, or
Secondary), and that there is no career progression-related incentive to move from being teachers in
early stages to later stages or vice versa (though such career moves across stages will be allowed,
provided the teacher has the desire and qualifications for such a move). This is to support the fact that
all stages of school education will require the highest-quality teachers, and no stage will be
considered more important than any other.

5.19. Vertical mobility of teachers based on merit will also be paramount; outstanding teachers with
demonstrated leadership and management skills would be trained over time to take on academic
leadership positions in schools, school complexes, BRCs, CRCs, BITEs, DIETs as well as relevant
government departments.

Professional Standards for Teachers
5.20. A common guiding set of National Professional Standards for Teachers (NPST) will be
developed by 2022, by the National Council for Teacher Education in its restructured new form as a
Professional Standard Setting Body (PSSB) under the General Education Council (GEC), in
consultation with NCERT, SCERTs, teachers from across levels and regions, expert organizations in
teacher preparation and development, expert bodies in vocational education, and higher education
institutions. The standards would cover expectations of the role of the teacher at different levels of
expertise/stage, and the competencies required for that stage. It will also comprise standards for
performance appraisal, for each stage, that would be carried out on a periodic basis. The NPST will
also inform the design of pre-service teacher education programmes. This could be then adopted by
States and determine all aspects of teacher career management, including tenure, professional
development efforts, salary increases, promotions, and other recognitions. Promotions and salary
increases will not occur based on the length of tenure or seniority, but only on the basis of such
appraisal. The professional standards will be reviewed and revised in 2030, and thereafter every ten
years, on the basis of rigorous empirical analysis of the efficacy of the system.

Special educators
5.21. There is an urgent need for additional special educators for certain areas of school education.
Some examples of such specialist requirements include subject teaching for children with
disabilities/Divyang children at the Middle and Secondary school level, including teaching for
specific learning disabilities. Such teachers would require not only subject-teaching knowledge and
understanding of subject-related aims of education, but also the relevant skills for understanding of
special requirements of children. Therefore, such areas could be developed as secondary
specializations for subject teachers or generalist teachers, during or after pre-service teacher
preparation. They will be offered as certificate courses, in the pre-service as well as in-service mode,
either full time or as part-time/blended courses - again, necessarily, at multidisciplinary colleges or
universities. Greater synergy will be enabled between the course curriculum of NCTE and RCI to
ensure adequate availability of qualified special educators who can handle subject teaching as well.
Approach to Teacher Education

5.22. Recognizing that the teachers will require training in high-quality content as well as pedagogy,
teacher education will gradually be moved by 2030 into multidisciplinary colleges and universities.
As colleges and universities all move towards becoming multidisciplinary, they will also aim to
house outstanding education departments that offer B.Ed., M.Ed., and Ph.D. degrees in education.

5.23. By 2030, the minimum degree qualification for teaching will be a 4-year integrated B.Ed.
degree that teaches a range of knowledge content and pedagogy and includes strong practicum
training in the form of student-teaching at local schools. The 2-year B.Ed. programmes will also be
offered, by the same multidisciplinary institutions offering the 4-year integrated B.Ed., and will be
intended only for those who have already obtained Bachelor’s Degrees in other specialized subjects.
These B.Ed. programmes may also be suitably adapted as 1-year B.Ed. programmes, and will be
offered only to those who have completed the equivalent of 4-year multidisciplinary Bachelor’s
Degrees or who have obtained a Master’s degree in a specialty and wish to become a subject teacher
in that specialty. All such B.Ed. degrees would be offered only by accredited multidisciplinary higher
education institutions offering 4-year integrated B.Ed. programmes. Multidisciplinary higher
education institutions offering the 4-year in-class integrated B.Ed. programme and having
accreditation for ODL may also offer high-quality B.Ed. programmes in blended or ODL mode to
students in remote or difficult-to-access locations and also to in-service teachers who are aiming to
enhance their qualification, with suitable robust arrangements for mentoring and for the practicum-
training and student-teaching components of the programme.

5.24. All B.Ed. programmes will include training in time-tested as well as the most recent techniques
in pedagogy, including pedagogy with respect to foundational literacy and numeracy, multi-level
teaching and evaluation, teaching children with disabilities, teaching children with special interests or
talents, use of educational technology, and learner-centered and collaborative learning. All B.Ed.
programmes will include strong practicum training in the form of in-classroom teaching at local
schools. All B.Ed. programmes will also emphasize the practice of the Fundamental Duties (Article
51A) of the Indian Constitution along with other Constitutional provisions while teaching any subject
or performing any activity. It will also appropriately integrate environmental awareness and
sensitivity towards its conservation and sustainable development, so that environment education
becomes an integral part of school curricula.

5.25. Special shorter local teacher education programmes will also be available at BITEs, DIETs, or
at school complexes themselves for eminent local persons who can be hired to teach at schools or
school complexes as ‘master instructors’, for the purpose of promoting local professions, knowledge,
and skills, e.g., local art, music, agriculture, business, sports, carpentry, and other vocational crafts.

5.26. Shorter post-B.Ed. certification courses will also be made widely available, at multidisciplinary
colleges and universities, to teachers who may wish to move into more specialized areas of teaching,
such as the teaching of students with disabilities, or into leadership and management positions in the
schooling system, or to move from one stage to another between foundational, preparatory, middle,
and secondary stages.

5.27. It is recognized that there may be several pedagogical approaches internationally for teaching
particular subjects; NCERT will study, research, document, and compile the varied international
pedagogical approaches for teaching different subjects and make recommendations on what can be
learnt and assimilated from these approaches into the pedagogies being practiced in India.

5.28. By 2021, a new and comprehensive National Curriculum Framework for Teacher Education,
NCFTE 2021, will be formulated by the NCTE in consultation with NCERT, based on the principles
of this National Education Policy 2020. The framework will be developed after discussions with all
stakeholders including State Governments, relevant Ministries/Departments of Central Government
and various expert bodies, and will be made available in all regional languages. The NCFTE 2021
will also factor in the requirements of teacher education curricula for vocational education. The
NCFTE will thereafter be revised once every 5-10 years by reflecting the changes in revised NCFs as
well as emerging needs in teacher education.

5.29. Finally, in order to fully restore the integrity of the teacher education system, stringent action
will be taken against substandard stand-alone Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs) running in the
country, including shutting them down, if required.


6. Equitable and Inclusive Education: Learning for All

6.1. Education is the single greatest tool for achieving social justice and equality. Inclusive and
equitable education - while indeed an essential goal in its own right - is also critical to achieving an
inclusive and equitable society in which every citizen has the opportunity to dream, thrive, and
contribute to the nation. The education system must aim to benefit India’s children so that no child
loses any opportunity to learn and excel because of circumstances of birth or background. This Policy
reaffirms that bridging the social category gaps in access, participation, and learning outcomes in
school education will continue to be one of the major goals of all education sector development
programmes. This Chapter may be read in conjunction with Chapter 14 which discusses analogous
issues of Equity and Inclusion in Higher Education.

6.2. While the Indian education system and successive government policies have made steady
progress towards bridging gender and social category gaps in all levels of school education, large
disparities still remain - especially at the secondary level - particularly for socio-economically
disadvantaged groups that have been historically underrepresented in education. Socio-Economically
Disadvantaged Groups (SEDGs) can be broadly categorized based on gender identities (particularly
female and transgender individuals), socio-cultural identities (such as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes, OBCs, and minorities), geographical identities (such as students from villages, small towns,
and aspirational districts), disabilities (including learning disabilities), and socio-economic conditions
(such as migrant communities, low income households, children in vulnerable situations, victims of
or children of victims of trafficking, orphans including child beggars in urban areas, and the urban
poor). While overall enrolments in schools decline steadily from Grade 1 to Grade 12, this decline in
enrolments is significantly more pronounced for many of these SEDGs, with even greater declines for
female students within each of these SEDGs and often even steeper in higher education. A brief
status overview of the SEDGs that come within socio-cultural identities is given in following sub-
sections.

6.2.1. According to U-DISE 2016-17 data, about 19.6% of students belong to Scheduled Castes at the
primary level, but this fraction falls to 17.3% at the higher secondary level. These enrolment drop-
offs are more severe for Scheduled Tribes students (10.6% to 6.8%), and differently-abled children
(1.1% to 0.25%), with even greater declines for female students within each of these categories. The
decline in enrolment in higher education is even steeper.
6.2.2. A multiplicity of factors, including lack of access to quality schools, poverty, social mores &
customs, and language have had a detrimental effect on rates of enrolment and retention among the
Scheduled Castes. Bridging these gaps in access, participation, and learning outcomes of children
belonging to Scheduled Castes will continue to be one of the major goals. Also, the Other Backward
Classes (OBCs) which have been identified on the basis of historically being socially and
educationally backward also need special focus.
6.2.3. Tribal communities and children from Scheduled Tribes also face
disadvantages at multiple levels due to various historical and geographical factors. Children from
tribal communities often find their school education irrelevant and foreign to their lives, both
culturally and academically. While several programmatic interventions to uplift children from tribal
communities are currently in place, and will continue to be pursued, special mechanisms need to be
made to ensure that children belonging to tribal communities
receive the benefits of these interventions.
6.2.4. Minorities are also relatively underrepresented in school and higher education. The Policy
acknowledges the importance of interventions to promote education of children belonging to all
minority communities, and particularly those communities that are educationally underrepresented.
6.2.5. The Policy also recognizes the importance of creating enabling mechanisms for providing
Children With Special Needs (CWSN) or Divyang, the same opportunities of obtaining quality
education as any other child.
6.2.6. Separate strategies will be formulated for focused attention on reducing the social category
gaps in school education as outlined in the following sub-sections.

6.3. The critical problems and recommendations regarding ECCE, foundational literacy and
numeracy, access, enrolment and attendance discussed in Chapters 1–3, are particularly relevant and
important for underrepresented and disadvantaged groups. Therefore, the measures from Chapters 1–
3 will be targeted in a concerted way for SEDGs.

6.4. In addition, there have been various successful policies and schemes such as targeted
scholarships, conditional cash transfers to incentivize parents to send their children to school,
providing bicycles for transport, etc., that have significantly increased participation of SEDGs in the
schooling system in certain areas. These successful policies and schemes must be significantly
strengthened across the country.

6.5. It will also be essential to take into account research that ascertains which measures are
particularly effective for certain SEDGs. For example, providing bicycles and organizing cycling and
walking groups to provide access to school have been shown to be particularly powerful methods in
increasing participation of female students - even at lesser distances - because of the safety benefits
and comfort to parents that they provide. One-on-one teachers and tutors, peer tutoring, open
schooling, appropriate infrastructure, and suitable technological interventions to ensure access can be
particularly effective for certain children with disabilities. Schools providing quality ECCE reap the
greatest dividends for children who come from families that are economically disadvantaged.
Meanwhile, counsellors and/or well-trained social workers that work with and connect with students,
parents, schools, and teachers in order to improve attendance and learning outcomes have been found
to be especially effective for children in urban poor areas.

6.6. Data shows that certain geographical areas contain significantly larger proportions of SEDGs.
Also, there are geographical locations that have been identified as Aspirational Districts which
require special interventions for promoting their educational development. Hence, it is recommended
that regions of the country with large populations from educationally-disadvantaged SEDGs should
be declared Special Education Zones (SEZs), where all the schemes and policies are implemented to
the maximum through additional concerted efforts, in order to truly change their educational
landscape.

6.7. It must be noted that women cut across all underrepresented groups, making up about half of all
SEDGs. Unfortunately, the exclusion and inequity that SEDGs face is only amplified for the women
in these SEDGs. The policy additionally recognizes the special and critical role that women play in
society and in shaping social mores; therefore, providing a quality education to girls is the best way to
increase the education levels for these SEDGs, not just in the present but also in future generations.
The policy thus recommends that the policies and schemes designed to include students from SEDGs
should be especially targeted towards girls in these SEDGs.

6.8. In addition, the Government of India will constitute a ‘Gender-Inclusion Fund’ to build the
nation’s capacity to provide equitable quality education for all girls as well as transgender students.
The fund will be available to States to implement priorities determined by the Central government
critical for assisting female and transgender children in gaining access to education (such as the
provisions of sanitation and toilets, bicycles, conditional cash transfers, etc.); funds will also enable
States to support and scale effective community-based interventions that address local context-
specific barriers to female and transgender children’s access to and participation in education. Similar
‘Inclusion Fund’ schemes shall also be developed to address analogous access issues for other
SEDGs. In essence, this Policy aims to eliminate any remaining disparity in access to education
(including vocational education) for children from any gender or other socio-economically
disadvantaged group.

6.9. Free boarding facilities will be built - matching the standard of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas -
in school locations where students may have to come from far, and particularly for students who from
socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds, with suitable arrangements for the safety of all
children, especially girls. Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas will be strengthened and expanded to
increase the participation in quality schools (up to Grade 12) of girls from socio-economically
disadvantaged backgrounds. Additional Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas and Kendriya Vidyalayas will
be built around the country, especially in aspirational districts, Special Education Zones, and other
disadvantaged areas, to increase high-quality educational opportunities. Pre-school sections covering
at least one year of early childhood care and education will be added to Kendriya Vidyalayas and
other primary schools around the nation, particularly in disadvantaged areas.

6.10. Ensuring the inclusion and equal participation of children with disabilities in ECCE and the
schooling system will also be accorded the highest priority. Children with disabilities will be enabled
to fully participate in the regular schooling process from the Foundational Stage to higher education.
The Rights of Persons with Disabilities (RPWD) Act 2016 defines inclusive education as a ‘system of
education wherein students with and without disabilities learn together and the system of teaching
and learning is suitably adapted to meet the learning needs of different types of students with
disabilities’. This Policy is in complete consonance with the provisions of the RPWD Act 2016 and
endorses all its recommendations with regard to school education. While preparing the National
Curriculum Framework, NCERT will ensure that consultations are held with expert bodies such as
National Institutes of DEPwD.

6.11. To this end, schools/school complexes will be provided resources for the integration of children
with disabilities, recruitment of special educators with cross-disability training, and for the
establishment of resource centres, wherever needed, especially for children with severe or multiple
disabilities. Barrier free access for all children with disabilities will be enabled as per the RPWD Act.
Different categories of children with disabilities have differing needs. Schools and school complexes
will work and be supported for providing all children with disabilities accommodations and support
mechanisms tailored to suit their needs and to ensure their full participation and inclusion in the
classroom. In particular, assistive devices and appropriate technology-based tools, as well as adequate
and language-appropriate teaching-learning materials (e.g., textbooks in accessible formats such as
large print and Braille) will be made available to help children with disabilities integrate more easily
into classrooms and engage with teachers and their peers. This will apply to all school activities
including arts, sports, and vocational education. NIOS will develop high-quality modules to teach
Indian Sign Language, and to teach other basic subjects using Indian Sign Language. Adequate
attention will be paid to the safety and security of children with disabilities.

6.12. As per the RPWD Act 2016, children with benchmark disabilities shall have the choice of
regular or special schooling. Resource centres in conjunction with special educators will support the
rehabilitation and educational needs of learners with severe or multiple disabilities and will assist
parents/guardians in achieving high-quality home schooling and skilling for such students as needed.
Home-based education will continue to be a choice available for children with severe and profound
disabilities who are unable to go to schools. The children under home-based education must be
treated as equal to any other child in the general system. There shall be an audit of home-based
education for its efficiency and effectiveness using the principle of equity and equality of
opportunity. Guidelines and standards for home-based schooling shall be developed based on this
audit in line with the RPWD Act 2016. While it is clear that the education of all children with
disabilities is the responsibility of the State, technology-based solutions will be used for the
orientation of parents/caregivers along with wide-scale dissemination of learning materials to enable
parents/caregivers to actively support their children’s learning needs will be accorded priority.

6.13. Most classrooms have children with specific learning disabilities who need continuous support.
Research is clear that the earlier such support begins, the better the chances of progress. Teachers
must be helped to identify such learning disabilities early and plan specifically for their mitigation.
Specific actions will include the use of appropriate technology allowing and enabling children to
work at their own pace, with flexible curricula to leverage each child’s strengths, and creating an
ecosystem for appropriate assessment and certification. Assessment and certification agencies,
including the proposed new National Assessment Centre, PARAKH, will formulate guidelines and
recommend appropriate tools for conducting such assessment, from the foundational stage to higher
education (including for entrance exams), in order to ensure equitable access and opportunities for all
students with learning disabilities.

6.14. The awareness and knowledge of how to teach children with specific disabilities (including
learning disabilities) will be an integral part of all teacher education programmes, along with gender
sensitization and sensitization towards all underrepresented groups in order to reverse their
underrepresentation.

6.15. Alternative forms of schools, will be encouraged to preserve their traditions or alternative
pedagogical styles. At the same time, they will be supported to integrate the subject and learning
areas prescribed by the NCFSE into their curricula in order to reduce and eventually eliminate the
underrepresentation of children from these schools in higher education. In particular, financial
assistance will be provided to introduce science, mathematics, social studies, Hindi, English, State
languages, or other relevant subjects in the curriculum, as may be desired by these schools. This
would enable children studying in these schools to attain the learning outcomes defined for Grades 1–
12. Furthermore, students in such schools would be encouraged to appear for State or other Board
examinations and assessments by the NTA, and thereby enroll in higher education institutions.
Capacities of teachers in the teaching of science, mathematics, language, and social studies will be
developed including orientation to new pedagogical practices. Libraries and laboratories will be
strengthened and adequate reading materials like books, journals, etc., and other teaching-learning
materials will be made available.

6.16. Within SEDGs, and with respect to all the above policy points, special attention will be given to
reduce the disparities in the educational development of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. As
a part of the efforts to enhance participation in school education, special hostels in dedicated regions,
bridge courses, and financial assistance through fee waivers and scholarships will be offered to
talented and meritorious students from all SEDGs on a larger scale, especially at the secondary stage
of education, to facilitate their entry into higher education.

6.17. Under the aegis of the Ministry of Defence, State Governments may encourage opening NCC
wings in their secondary and higher secondary schools, including those located in tribal dominated
areas. This will enable harnessing of the natural talent and unique potential of students, which in turn
would help them to aspire to a successful career in the defence forces.

6.18. All scholarships and other opportunities and schemes available to students from SEDGs will be
coordinated and announced by a single agency and website to ensure that all students are aware of,
and may apply in a simplified manner on such a ‘single window system’, as per eligibility.

6.19. All the above policies and measures are absolutely critical to attaining full inclusion and equity
for all SEDGs - but they are not sufficient. What is also required is a change in school culture. All
participants in the school education system, including teachers, principals, administrators,
counsellors, and students, will be sensitized to the requirements of all students, the notions of
inclusion and equity, and the respect, dignity, and privacy of all persons. Such an educational culture
will provide the best pathway to help students become empowered individuals who, in turn, will
enable society to transform into one that is responsible towards its most vulnerable citizens. Inclusion
and equity will become a key aspect of teacher education (and training for all leadership,
administrative, and other positions in schools); efforts will be made to recruit more high-quality
teachers and leaders from SEDGs in order to bring in excellent role models for all students.

6.20. Students will be sensitized through this new school culture, brought in by teachers, trained
social workers and counsellors as well as through corresponding changes to bring in an inclusive
school curriculum. The school curriculum will include, early on, material on human values such as
respect for all persons, empathy, tolerance, human rights, gender equality, non-violence, global
citizenship, inclusion, and equity. It would also include more detailed knowledge of various cultures,
religions, languages, gender identities, etc. to sensitize and develop respect for diversity. Any biases
and stereotypes in school curriculum will be removed, and more material will be included that is
relevant and relatable to all communities.


7. Efficient Resourcing and Effective Governance through School Complexes/Clusters

7.1. While the establishment of primary schools in every habitation across the country-driven by the
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), now subsumed under the Samagra Shiksha Scheme and other
important efforts across the States - has helped to ensure near-universal access to primary schools, it
has also led to the development of numerous very small schools. According to U-DISE 2016–17 data,
nearly 28% of India’s public primary schools and 14.8% of India’s upper primary schools have less
than 30 students. The average number of students per grade in the elementary schooling system
(primary and upper primary, i.e., Grades 1–8) is about 14, with a notable proportion having below 6;
during the year 2016–17, there were 1,08,017 single-teacher schools, the majority of them (85743 )
being primary schools serving Grades 1–5.

7.2. These small school sizes have rendered it economically suboptimal and operationally complex to
run good schools, in terms of deployment of teachers as well as the provision of critical physical
resources. Teachers often teach multiple grades at a time, and teach multiple subjects, including
subjects in which they may have no prior background; key areas such as music, arts, and sports are
too often simply not taught; and physical resources, such as lab and sports equipment and library
books, are simply not available across schools.

7.3. The isolation of small schools also has a negative effect on education and the teaching-learning
process. Teachers function best in communities and teams, and so do students. Small schools also
present a systemic challenge for governance and management. The geographical dispersion,
challenging access conditions, and the very large numbers of schools make it difficult to reach all
schools equally. Administrative structures have not been aligned with the increases in the number of
school or with the unified structure of the Samagra Shiksha Scheme.

7.4. Although consolidation of schools is an option that is often discussed, it must be carried out very
judiciously, and only when it is ensured that there is no impact on access. Such measures are
nevertheless likely to result only in limited consolidation, and would not solve the overall structural
problem and challenges presented by the large numbers of small schools.

7.5. These challenges will, by 2025, be addressed by State/UT governments by adopting innovative
mechanisms to group or rationalize schools. The objective behind this intervention would be to
ensure that every school has: (a) adequate number of counsellors/trained social workers and teachers
(shared or otherwise) for teaching all subjects including art, music science, sports, languages,
vocational subjects, etc; (b) adequate resources (shared or otherwise), such as a library, science labs,
computer labs, skill labs, playgrounds, sports equipment and facilities, etc.; (c) a sense of community
is built to overcome the isolation of teachers, students, and schools, through joint professional
development programmes, sharing of teaching-learning content, joint content development, holding
joint activities such as art and science exhibitions, sports meets, quizzes and debates, and fairs; (d)
cooperation and support across schools for the education of children with disabilities; and (e)
improved governance of the schooling system by devolving all finer decisions, to Principals, teachers,
and other stakeholders within each group of schools and treating such a group of schools, which
range from the foundational stage through the secondary stage, as an integrated semi-autonomous
unit.

7.6. One possible mechanism for accomplishing the above would be the establishment of a grouping
structure called the school complex, consisting of one secondary school together with all other
schools offering lower grades in its neighbourhood including Anganwadis, in a radius of five to ten
kilometers. This suggestion was first made by the Education Commission (1964–66) but was left
unimplemented. This Policy strongly endorses the idea of the school complex/cluster, wherever
possible. The aim of the school complex/cluster will be greater resource efficiency and more effective
functioning, coordination, leadership, governance, and management of schools in the cluster.

7.7. The establishment of school complexes/clusters and the sharing of resources across complexes
will have a number of other benefits as a consequence, such as improved support for children with
disabilities, more topic-centred clubs and academic/sports/arts/crafts events across school complexes,
better incorporation of art, music, language, vocational subjects, physical education, and other
subjects in the classroom through the sharing of teachers in these subjects including use of ICT tools
to conduct virtual classes, better student support, enrolment, attendance, and performance through the
sharing of social workers and counsellors, and School Complex Management Committees (rather
than simply School Management Committees) for more robust and improved governance,
monitoring, oversight, innovations, and initiatives by local stakeholders. Building such larger
communities of schools, school leaders, teachers, students, supporting staff, parents, and local
citizens would energize and empower the schooling system, and in a resource-efficient manner.

7.8. The governance of schools will also improve and become far more efficient with school
complexes/clusters. First, the DSE will devolve authority to the school complex/cluster, which will
act as a semi-autonomous unit. The District Education Officer (DEO) and the Block Education
Officers (BEO) will interact primarily with each school complex/cluster as a single unit and facilitate
its work. The complex itself will perform certain tasks delegated by the DSE and will deal with the
individual schools within it. The school complex/cluster will be given significant autonomy by the
DSE to innovate towards providing integrated education and to experiment with pedagogies,
curriculum, etc., while adhering to the National Curricular Framework (NCF) and State Curricular
Framework (SCF). Under this organization, schools will gain in strength, will be able to exercise
greater freedom, and will contribute towards making the complex more innovative and responsive.
Meanwhile, the DSE will be able to focus on the aggregate level goals that need to be achieved,
improving overall system effectiveness.

7.9. The culture of working to a plan, both short-term and long-term ones, will be developed through
such complexes/clusters. Schools will develop their plans (SDPs) with the involvement of their
SMCs. These plans will then become the basis for the creation of School Complex/Cluster
Development Plans (SCDPs). The SCDP will also involve the plans of all other institutions
associated with the school complex, such as vocational education institutions, and will be created by
the principals and teachers of the school complex with the involvement of the SCMC and will be
made available publicly. The plans will include human resources, learning resources, physical
resources and infrastructure, improvement initiatives, financial resources, school culture initiatives,
teacher development plans, and educational outcomes. It will detail the efforts to leverage the
teachers and students across the school complex to develop vibrant learning communities. The SDP
and SCDP will be the primary mechanism to align all stakeholders of the school, including the DSE.
The SMC and SCMC will use the SDP and SCDP for oversight of the functioning and direction of
the school and will assist in the execution of these plans. The DSE, through its relevant official, e.g.,
the BEO, will endorse and confirm the SCDP of each school complex. It will then provide the
resources (financial, human, physical, etc.) necessary to achieve the SCDPs, both short-term (1-year)
and long-term (3-5 years). It will also provide all other relevant support to the school complexes to
achieve the educational outcomes. The DSE and the SCERT may share specific norms (e.g.,
financial, staffing, process) and frameworks for development of the SDP and SCDP with all schools,
which may be revised periodically.

7.10. To further enhance cooperation and positive synergy among schools, including between public
and private schools, the twinning/pairing of one public school with one private school will be adopted
across the country, so that such paired schools may meet/interact with each other, learn from each
other, and also share resources, if possible. Best practices of private schools will be documented,
shared, and institutionalized in public schools, and vice versa, where possible.

7.11. Every State will be encouraged to strengthen existing or establish “Bal Bhavans” where
children of all ages can visit once a week (e.g., on weekends) or more often, as a special daytime
boarding school, to partake in art-related, career-related, and play-related activities. Such Bal
Bhavans may be incorporated as a part of school complexes/clusters if possible.

7.12. The school should be a point of celebration and honour for the whole community. The dignity
of the school as an institution should be restored and important dates, such as the foundation day of
the school, will be celebrated along with the community and the list of important alumni may be
displayed and honoured. Furthermore, the un-utilized capacity of school infrastructure could be used
to promote social, intellectual, and volunteer activities for the community and to promote social
cohesion during non-teaching / schooling hours and may be used as a “Samajik Chetna Kendra”.


8. Standard-setting and Accreditation for School Education

8.1. The goal of the school education regulatory system must be to continually improve educational
outcomes; it must not overly restrict schools, prevent innovation, or demoralize teachers, principals,
and students. All in all, regulation must aim to empower schools and teachers with trust, enabling
them to strive for excellence and perform at their very best, while ensuring the integrity of the system
through the enforcement of complete transparency and full public disclosure of all finances,
procedures, and educational outcomes.

8.2. At present, all main functions of governance and regulation of the school education system -
namely, the provision of public education, the regulation of education institutions, and policymaking
- are handled by a single body, i.e., the Department of School Education or its arms. This leads to
conflict of interests and excessive centralized concentration of power; it also leads to ineffective
management of the school system, as efforts towards quality educational provision are often diluted
by the focus on the other roles, particularly regulation, that the Departments of School Education also
perform.

8.3. The current regulatory regime also has not been able to curb the commercialization and economic
exploitation of parents by many for-profit private schools, yet at the same time it has all too often
inadvertently discouraged public-spirited private/philanthropic schools. There has been far too much
asymmetry between the regulatory approaches to public and private schools, even though the goals of
both types of schools should be the same: to provide quality education.

8.4. The public education system is the foundation of a vibrant democratic society, and the way it is
run must be transformed and invigorated in order to achieve the highest levels of educational
outcomes for the nation. At the same time, the private/philanthropic school sector must also be
encouraged and enabled to play a significant and beneficial role.

8.5. The key principles and recommendations of this Policy regarding the State school education
system, the independent responsibilities within that system, and the approach to its regulation are as
follows:
(a) The Department of School Education, which is the apex state-level body in school education,
will be responsible for overall monitoring and policymaking for continual improvement of
the public education system; it will not be involved with the provision and operation of
schools or with the regulation of schools, in order to ensure due focus on the improvement of
public schools and to eliminate conflict of interests.
(b) The educational operations and service provision for the public schooling system of the
whole State will be handled by the Directorate of School Education (including the offices of
the DEO and BEO, etc.); it will work independently to implement policies regarding
educational operations and provision.
(c) An effective quality self-regulation or accreditation system will be instituted for all stages of
education including pre-school education - private, public, and philanthropic - to ensure
compliance with essential quality standards. To ensure that all schools follow certain minimal
professional and quality standards, States/UTs will set up an independent, State-wide, body
called the State School Standards Authority (SSSA). The SSSA will establish a minimal set
of standards based on basic parameters (namely, safety, security, basic infrastructure, number
of teachers across subjects and grades, financial probity, and sound processes of governance),
which shall be followed by all schools. The framework for these parameters will be created
by the SCERT in consultation with various stakeholders, especially teachers and schools.
Transparent public self-disclosure of all the basic regulatory information, as laid down by the
SSSA, will be used extensively for public oversight and accountability. The dimensions on
which information has to be self-disclosed, and the format of disclosure will be decided by
the SSSA in accordance with global best practices for standard-setting for schools. This
information will have to be made available and kept updated and accurate by all schools, on
the aforementioned public website maintained by the SSSA and on the schools’ websites.
Any complaints or grievances from stakeholders or others arising out of the information
placed in the public domain shall be adjudicated by the SSSA. Feedback from randomly
selected students will be solicited online to ensure valuable input at regular intervals.
Technology will be employed suitably to ensure efficiency and transparency in all work of
the SSSA. This will bring down significantly the heavy load of regulatory mandates currently
borne by schools.
(d) Academic matters, including academic standards and curricula in the State will be led by the
SCERT (with close consultation and collaboration with the NCERT), which will be
reinvigorated as an institution. The SCERT will develop a School Quality Assessment and
Accreditation Framework (SQAAF) through wide consultations with all stakeholders. The
SCERT will also lead a “change management process” for the reinvigoration of CRCs,
BRCs, and DIETs which must change the capacity and work culture of these institutions in 3
years, developing them into vibrant institutions of excellence. Meanwhile, certification of
competencies of students at the school-leaving stage will be handled by the Boards of
Assessment/Examination in each State.

8.6. The culture, structures, and systems that empower and provide adequate resources to schools,
institutions, teachers, officials, communities, and other stakeholders, will also build concomitant
accountability. Each stakeholder and participant of the education system will be accountable to
perform their role with the highest level of integrity, full commitment, and exemplary work ethic.
Each role of the system will have explicitly articulated role expectations and rigorous assessment of
their performance vis-à-vis these expectations. The assessment system will be objective and
developmentally oriented, while ensuring accountability. It will have multiple sources of feedback
and assessment, to ensure a full view of the performance (and will not just be linked simplistically,
e.g., to ‘marks’ of students). The assessment will recognize that outcomes such as educational
attainment of students have multiple intervening variables and extraneous influences. It will also
recognize that education requires teamwork, particularly at the level of the school. Promotion,
recognition, and accountability of all individuals will be based on such performance assessment. All
functionaries will be responsible to ensure that this development, performance, and accountability
system is run with high integrity, and systematically, within their span of control.

8.7. Public and private schools (except the schools that are managed/aided/controlled by the Central
government) will be assessed and accredited on the same criteria, benchmarks, and processes,
emphasizing online and offline public disclosure and transparency, so as to ensure that public-spirited
private schools are encouraged and not stifled in any way. Private philanthropic efforts for quality
education will be encouraged - thereby affirming the public-good nature of education - while
protecting parents and communities from arbitrary increases in tuition fees. Public disclosure on the
school website and on the SSSA website - for both public and private schools - would include (at the
very least) information on the numbers of classrooms, students, and teachers, subjects taught, any
fees, and overall student outcomes on standardized evaluations such as the NAS and SAS. For
schools controlled/managed/aided by the Central government, the CBSE in consultation with the
MHRD shall prepare a framework. All the education institutions will be held to similar standards of
audit and disclosure as a 'not-for-profit' entity. Surpluses, if any, will be reinvested in the educational
sector.

8.8. The standard-setting/regulatory framework and the facilitating systems for school regulation,
accreditation, and governance shall be reviewed to enable improvements on the basis of the learnings
and experiences gained in the last decade. This review will aim to ensure that all students, particularly
students from underprivileged and disadvantaged sections, shall have universal, free and compulsory
access to high-quality and equitable schooling from early childhood care and education (age 3
onwards) through higher secondary education (i.e., until Grade 12). The overemphasis on inputs, and
the mechanistic nature of their specifications – physical and infrastructural – will be changed and
requirements made more responsive to realities on the ground, e.g., regarding land areas and room
sizes, practicalities of playgrounds in urban areas, etc. These mandates will be adjusted and loosened,
leaving suitable flexibility for each school to make its own decisions based on local needs and
constraints, while ensuring safety, security, and a pleasant and productive learning space. Educational
outcomes and the transparent disclosure of all financial, academic, and operational matters will be
given due importance and will be incorporated suitably in the assessment of schools. This will further
improve India's progress towards achieving Sustainable Development Goal 4 (SDG4) of ensuring
free, equitable, and quality primary and secondary education for all children.

8.9. The aim of the public-school education system will be to impart the highest quality education so
that it becomes the most attractive option for parents from all walks of life for educating their
children.

8.10. For a periodic ‘health check-up’ of the overall system, a sample-based National Achievement
Survey (NAS) of student learning levels will be carried out by the proposed new National
Assessment Centre, PARAKH with suitable cooperation with other governmental bodies- such as the
NCERT– that may assist in assessment procedures as well as data analysis. The assessment will cover
students across government as well as private schools. States will also be encouraged to conduct their
own census-based State Assessment Survey (SAS), the results of which will be used only for
developmental purposes, public disclosure by schools of their overall and anonymized student
outcomes, and for continuous improvement of the school education system. Until the establishment
of the proposed new National Assessment Centre, PARAKH, NCERT may continue to carry out
NAS.

8.11. Finally, the children and adolescents enrolled in schools must not be forgotten in this whole
process; after all, the school system is designed for them. Careful attention must be paid to their
safety and rights- particularly girl children - and the various difficult issues faced by adolescents,
such as substance or drug abuse and forms of discrimination and harassment including violence, with
clear, safe, and efficient mechanisms for reporting and for due process on any infractions against
children’s/adolescents’ rights or safety. The development of such mechanisms that are effective,
timely, and well-known to all students will be accorded high priority.