Part II. HIGHER EDUCATION

9. Quality Universities and Colleges: A New and Forward-looking Vision for India’s
Higher Education System

9.1. Higher education plays an extremely important role in promoting human as well as societal well-
being and in developing India as envisioned in its Constitution - a democratic, just, socially-
conscious, cultured, and humane nation upholding liberty, equality, fraternity, and justice for all.
Higher education significantly contributes towards sustainable livelihoods and economic
development of the nation. As India moves towards becoming a knowledge economy and society,
more and more young Indians are likely to aspire for higher education.
9.1.1. Given the 21st century requirements, quality higher education must aim to develop good,
thoughtful, well-rounded, and creative individuals. It must enable an individual to study one or more
specialized areas of interest at a deep level, and also develop character, ethical and Constitutional
values, intellectual curiosity, scientific temper, creativity, spirit of service, and 21st century
capabilities across a range of disciplines including sciences, social sciences, arts, humanities,
languages, as well as professional, technical, and vocational subjects. A quality higher education
must enable personal accomplishment and enlightenment, constructive public engagement, and
productive contribution to the society. It must prepare students for more meaningful and satisfying
lives and work roles and enable economic independence.
9.1.2. For the purpose of developing holistic individuals, it is essential that an identified set of skills
and values will be incorporated at each stage of learning, from pre-school to higher education.
9.1.3. At the societal level, higher education must enable the development of an enlightened, socially
conscious, knowledgeable, and skilled nation that can find and implement robust solutions to its own
problems. Higher education must form the basis for knowledge creation and innovation thereby
contributing to a growing national economy. The purpose of quality higher education is, therefore,
more than the creation of greater opportunities for individual employment. It represents the key to
more vibrant, socially engaged, cooperative communities and a happier, cohesive, cultured,
productive, innovative, progressive, and prosperous nation.

9.2. Some of the major problems currently faced by the higher education system in India include:
(a) a severely fragmented higher educational ecosystem;
(b) less emphasis on the development of cognitive skills and learning outcomes;
(c) a rigid separation of disciplines, with early specialisation and streaming of students into
narrow areas of study;
(d) limited access particularly in socio-economically disadvantaged areas, with few HEIs that
teach in local languages
(e) limited teacher and institutional autonomy;
(f) inadequate mechanisms for merit-based career management and progression of faculty and
institutional leaders;
(g) lesser emphasis on research at most universities and colleges, and lack of competitive peer-
reviewed research funding across disciplines;
(h) suboptimal governance and leadership of HEIs;
(i) an ineffective regulatory system; and
(j) large affiliating universities resulting in low standards of undergraduate education.

9.3. This policy envisions a complete overhaul and re-energising of the higher education system to
overcome these challenges and thereby deliver high-quality higher education, with equity and
inclusion. The policy’s vision includes the following key changes to the current system:
(a) moving towards a higher educational system consisting of large, multidisciplinary
universities and colleges, with at least one in or near every district, and with more HEIs
across India that offer medium of instruction or programmes in local/Indian languages;
(b) moving towards a more multidisciplinary undergraduate education;
(c) moving towards faculty and institutional autonomy;
(d) revamping curriculum, pedagogy, assessment, and student support for enhanced student
experiences;
(e) reaffirming the integrity of faculty and institutional leadership positions through merit-
appointments and career progression based on teaching, research, and service;
(f) establishment of a National Research Foundation to fund outstanding peer-reviewed research
and to actively seed research in universities and colleges;
(g) governance of HEIs by high qualified independent boards having academic and
administrative autonomy;
(h) “light but tight” regulation by a single regulator for higher education;
(i) increased access, equity, and inclusion through a range of measures, including greater
opportunities for outstanding public education; scholarships by private/philanthropic
universities for disadvantaged and underprivileged students; online education, and Open
Distance Learning (ODL); and all infrastructure and learning materials accessible and
available to learners with disabilities.


10. Institutional Restructuring and Consolidation

10.1. The main thrust of this policy regarding higher education is to end the fragmentation of higher
education by transforming higher education institutions into large multidisciplinary universities,
colleges, and HEI clusters/Knowledge Hubs, each of which will aim to have 3,000 or more students.
This would help build vibrant communities of scholars and peers, break down harmful silos, enable
students to become well-rounded across disciplines including artistic, creative, and analytic subjects
as well as sports, develop active research communities across disciplines including cross-disciplinary
research, and increase resource efficiency, both material and human, across higher education.

10.2. Moving to large multidisciplinary universities and HEI clusters is thus the highest
recommendation of this policy regarding the structure of higher education. The ancient Indian
universities Takshashila, Nalanda, Vallabhi, and Vikramshila, which had thousands of students from
India and the world studying in vibrant multidisciplinary environments, amply demonstrated the type
of great success that large multidisciplinary research and teaching universities could bring. India
urgently needs to bring back this great Indian tradition to create well-rounded and innovative
individuals, and which is already transforming other countries educationally and economically.

10.3. This vision of higher education will require, in particular, a new conceptual
perception/understanding for what constitutes a higher education institution (HEI), i.e., a university or
a college. A university will mean a multidisciplinary institution of higher learning that offers
undergraduate and graduate programmes, with high quality teaching, research, and community
engagement. The definition of university will thus allow a spectrum of institutions that range from
those that place equal emphasis on teaching and research i.e., Research-intensive Universities, those
that place greater emphasis on teaching but still conduct significant research i.e. Teaching-intensive
Universities. Meanwhile, an Autonomous degree-granting College (AC) will refer to a large
multidisciplinary institution of higher learning that grants undergraduate degrees and is primarily
focused on undergraduate teaching though it would not be restricted to that and it need not be
restricted to that and it would generally be smaller than a typical university.

10.4. A stage-wise mechanism for granting graded autonomy to colleges, through a transparent
system of graded accreditation, will be established. Colleges will be encouraged, mentored,
supported, and incentivized to gradually attain the minimum benchmarks required for each level of
accreditation. Over a period of time, it is envisaged that every college would develop into either an
Autonomous degree-granting College, or a constituent college of a university - in the latter case, it
would be fully a part of the university. With appropriate accreditations, Autonomous degree-granting
Colleges could evolve into Research-intensive or Teaching-intensive Universities, if they so aspire.

10.5. It must be clearly stated that these three broad types of institutions are not in any natural way a
rigid, exclusionary categorization, but are along a continuum. HEIs will have the autonomy and
freedom to move gradually from one category to another, based on their plans, actions, and
effectiveness. The most salient marker for these categories of institutions will be the focus of their
goals and work. The Accreditation System will develop and use appropriately different and relevant
norms across this range of HEIs. However, the expectations of high quality of education, and of
teaching-learning, across all HEIs will be the same.

10.6. In addition to teaching and research, HEIs will have other crucial responsibilities, which they
will discharge through appropriate resourcing, incentives, and structures. These include supporting
other HEIs in their development, community engagement and service, contribution to various fields
of practice, faculty development for the higher education system, and support to school education.

10.7. By 2040, all higher education institutions (HEIs) shall aim to become multidisciplinary
institutions and shall aim to have larger student enrolments preferably in the thousands, for optimal
use of infrastructure and resources, and for the creation of vibrant multidisciplinary communities.
Since this process will take time, all HEIs will firstly plan to become multidisciplinary by 2030, and
then gradually increase student strength to the desired levels.

10.8. More HEIs shall be established and developed in underserved regions to ensure full access,
equity, and inclusion. There shall, by 2030, be at least one large multidisciplinary HEI in or near
every district. Steps shall be taken towards developing high-quality higher education institutions both
public and private that have medium of instruction in local/Indian languages or bilingually. The aim
will be to increase the Gross Enrolment Ratio in higher education including vocational education
from 26.3% (2018) to 50% by 2035. While a number of new institutions may be developed to attain
these goals, a large part of the capacity creation will be achieved by consolidating, substantially
expanding, and also improving existing HEIs.

10.9. Growth will be in both public and private institutions, with a strong emphasis on developing a
large number of outstanding public institutions. There will be a fair and transparent system for
determining increased levels of public funding support for public HEIs. This system will give an
equitable opportunity for all public institutions to grow and develop, and will be based on transparent,
pre-announced criteria from within the accreditation norms of the Accreditation System. HEIs
delivering education of the highest quality as laid down in this Policy will be incentivized in
expanding their capacity.

10.10. Institutions will have the option to run Open Distance Learning (ODL) and online
programmes, provided they are accredited to do so, in order to enhance their offerings, improve
access, increase GER, and provide opportunities for lifelong learning (SDG 4). All ODL programmes
and their components leading to any diploma or degree will be of standards and quality equivalent to
the highest quality programmes run by the HEIs on their campuses. Top institutions accredited for
ODL will be encouraged and supported to develop high-quality online courses. Such quality online
courses will be suitably integrated into curricula of HEIs, and blended mode will be preferred.

10.11. Single-stream HEIs will be phased out over time, and all will move towards becoming vibrant
multidisciplinary institutions or parts of vibrant multidisciplinary HEI clusters, in order to enable and
encourage high-quality multidisciplinary and cross-disciplinary teaching and research across fields.
Single-stream HEIs will, in particular, add departments across different fields that would strengthen
the single stream that they currently serve. Through the attainment of suitable accreditations, all HEIs
will gradually move towards full autonomy - academic and administrative - in order to enable this
vibrant culture. The autonomy of public institutions will be backed by adequate public financial
support and stability. Private institutions with a public-spirited commitment to high-quality equitable
education will be encouraged.

10.12. The new regulatory system envisioned by this Policy will foster this overall culture of
empowerment and autonomy to innovate, including by gradually phasing out the system of ‘affiliated
colleges’ over a period of fifteen years through a system of graded autonomy, and to be carried out in
a challenge mode. Each existing affiliating university will be responsible for mentoring its affiliated
colleges so that they can develop their capabilities and achieve minimum benchmarks in academic
and curricular matters; teaching and assessment; governance reforms; financial robustness; and
administrative efficiency. All colleges currently affiliated to a university shall attain the required
benchmarks over time to secure the prescribed accreditation benchmarks and eventually become
autonomous degree-granting colleges. This will be achieved through a concerted national effort
including suitable mentoring and governmental support for the same.

10.13. The overall higher education sector will aim to be an integrated higher education system,
including professional and vocational education. This Policy and its approach will be equally
applicable to all HEIs across all current streams, which would eventually merge into one coherent
ecosystem of higher education.

10.14. University, worldwide, means a multidisciplinary institution of higher learning that offers
undergraduate, graduate, and Ph.D programmes, and engages in high-quality teaching and research.
The present complex nomenclature of HEIs in the country such as ‘deemed to be university’,
‘affiliating university’, ‘affiliating technical university', ‘unitary university’ shall be replaced simply
by 'university' on fulfilling the criteria as per norms.


11. Towards a More Holistic and Multidisciplinary Education

11.1. India has a long tradition of holistic and multidisciplinary learning, from universities such as
Takshashila and Nalanda, to the extensive literatures of India combining subjects across fields.
Ancient Indian literary works such as Banabhatta’s Kadambari described a good education as
knowledge of the 64 Kalaas or arts; and among these 64 ‘arts’ were not only subjects, such as
singing and painting, but also ‘scientific ’fields, such as chemistry and mathematics, ‘vocational ’
fields such as carpentry and clothes-making, ‘professional ’fields, such as medicine and engineering,
as well as ‘soft skills’ such as communication, discussion, and debate. The very idea that all
branches of creative human endeavour, including mathematics, science, vocational subjects,
professional subjects, and soft skills should be considered ‘arts’, has distinctly Indian origins. This
notion of a ‘knowledge of many arts’ or what in modern times is often called the ‘liberal arts’ (i.e., a
liberal notion of the arts) must be brought back to Indian education, as it is exactly the kind of
education that will be required for the 21st century.

11.2. Assessments of educational approaches in undergraduate education that integrate the humanities
and arts with Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) have consistently showed
positive learning outcomes, including increased creativity and innovation, critical thinking and
higher-order thinking capacities, problem-solving abilities, teamwork, communication skills, more in-
depth learning and mastery of curricula across fields, increases in social and moral awareness, etc.,
besides general engagement and enjoyment of learning. Research is also improved and enhanced
through a holistic and multidisciplinary education approach.

11.3. A holistic and multidisciplinary education would aim to develop all capacities of human beings
-intellectual, aesthetic, social, physical, emotional, and moral in an integrated manner. Such an
education will help develop well-rounded individuals that possess critical 21st century capacities in
fields across the arts, humanities, languages, sciences, social sciences, and professional, technical,
and vocational fields; an ethic of social engagement; soft skills, such as communication, discussion
and debate; and rigorous specialization in a chosen field or fields. Such a holistic education shall be,
in the long term, the approach of all undergraduate programmes, including those in professional,
technical, and vocational disciplines.

11.4. A holistic and multidisciplinary education, as described so beautifully in India’s past, is indeed
what is needed for the education of India to lead the country into the 21st century and the fourth
industrial revolution. Even engineering institutions, such as IITs, will move towards more holistic and
multidisciplinary education with more arts and humanities. Students of arts and humanities will aim
to learn more science and all will make an effort to incorporate more vocational subjects and soft
skills.

11.5. Imaginative and flexible curricular structures will enable creative combinations of disciplines
for study, and would offer multiple entry and exit points, thus, removing currently prevalent rigid
boundaries and creating new possibilities for life-long learning. Graduate-level, master’s and doctoral
education in large multidisciplinary universities, while providing rigorous research-based
specialization, would also provide opportunities for multidisciplinary work, including in academia,
government, and industry.

11.6. Large multidisciplinary universities and colleges will facilitate the move towards high-quality
holistic and multidisciplinary education. Flexibility in curriculum and novel and engaging course
options will be on offer to students, in addition to rigorous specialization in a subject or subjects. This
will be encouraged by increased faculty and institutional autonomy in setting curricula. Pedagogy
will have an increased emphasis on communication, discussion, debate, research, and opportunities
for cross-disciplinary and interdisciplinary thinking.

11.7. Departments in Languages, Literature, Music, Philosophy, Indology, Art, Dance, Theatre,
Education, Mathematics, Statistics, Pure and Applied Sciences, Sociology, Economics, Sports,
Translation and Interpretation, and other such subjects needed for a multidisciplinary, stimulating
Indian education and environment will be established and strengthened at all HEIs. Credits will be
given in all Bachelor’s Degree programmes for these subjects if they are done from such departments
or through ODL mode when they are not offered in-class at the HEI.

11.8. Towards the attainment of such a holistic and multidisciplinary education, the flexible and
innovative curricula of all HEIs shall include credit-based courses and projects in the areas of
community engagement and service, environmental education, and value-based education.
Environment education will include areas such as climate change, pollution, waste management,
sanitation, conservation of biological diversity, management of biological resources and biodiversity,
forest and wildlife conservation, and sustainable development and living. Value-based education will
include the development of humanistic, ethical, Constitutional, and universal human values of truth
(satya), righteous conduct (dharma), peace (shanti), love (prem), nonviolence (ahimsa), scientific
temper, citizenship values, and also life-skills; lessons in seva/service and participation in community
service programmes will be considered an integral part of a holistic education. As the world is
becoming increasingly interconnected, Global Citizenship Education (GCED), a response to
contemporary global challenges, will be provided to empower learners to become aware of and
understand global issues and to become active promoters of more peaceful, tolerant, inclusive, secure,
and sustainable societies. Finally, as part of a holistic education, students at all HEIs will be provided
with opportunities for internships with local industry, businesses, artists, crafts persons, etc., as well
as research internships with faculty and researchers at their own or other HEIs/research institutions,
so that students may actively engage with the practical side of their learning and, as a by-product,
further improve their employability.

11.9. The structure and lengths of degree programmes shall be adjusted accordingly. The
undergraduate degree will be of either 3 or 4-year duration, with multiple exit options within this
period, with appropriate certifications, e.g., a certificate after completing 1 year in a discipline or field
including vocational and professional areas, or a diploma after 2 years of study, or a Bachelor’s
degree after a 3-year programme. The 4-year multidisciplinary Bachelor's programme, however, shall
be the preferred option since it allows the opportunity to experience the full range of holistic and
multidisciplinary education in addition to a focus on the chosen major and minors as per the choices
of the student. An Academic Bank of Credit (ABC) shall be established which would digitally store
the academic credits earned from various recognized HEIs so that the degrees from an HEI can be
awarded taking into account credits earned. The 4-year programme may also lead to a degree ‘with
Research’ if the student completes a rigorous research project in their major area(s) of study as
specified by the HEI.

11.10. HEIs will have the flexibility to offer different designs of Master’s programmes: (a) there may
be a 2-year programme with the second year devoted entirely to research for those who have
completed the 3-year Bachelor’s programme; (b) for students completing a 4-year Bachelor’s
programme with Research, there could be a 1-year Master’s programme; and (c) there may be an
integrated 5-year Bachelor’s/Master’s programme. Undertaking a Ph.D. shall require either a
Master’s degree or a 4-year Bachelor’s degree with Research. The M.Phil. programme shall be
discontinued.

11.11. Model public universities for holistic and multidisciplinary education, at par with IITs, IIMs,
etc., called MERUs (Multidisciplinary Education and Research Universities) will be set up and will
aim to attain the highest global standards in quality education. They will also help set the highest
standards for multidisciplinary education across India.

11.12. HEIs will focus on research and innovation by setting up start-up incubation centres;
technology development centres; centres in frontier areas of research; greater industry-academic
linkages; and interdisciplinary research including humanities and social sciences research. Given the
scenario of epidemics and pandemics, it is critical that HEIs take the lead to undertake research in
areas of infectious diseases, epidemiology, virology, diagnostics, instrumentation, vaccinology and
other relevant areas. HEIs will develop specific hand holding mechanisms and competitions for
promoting innovation among student communities. The NRF will function to help enable and support
such a vibrant research and innovation culture across HEIs, research labs, and other research
organizations.


12. Optimal Learning Environments and Support for Students

12.1. Effective learning requires a comprehensive approach that involves appropriate curriculum,
engaging pedagogy, continuous formative assessment, and adequate student support. The curriculum
must be interesting and relevant, and updated regularly to align with the latest knowledge
requirements and to meet specified learning outcomes. High-quality pedagogy is then necessary to
successfully impart the curricular material to students; pedagogical practices determine the learning
experiences that are provided to students, thus directly influencing learning outcomes. The
assessment methods must be scientific, designed to continuously improve learning and test the
application of knowledge. Last but not least, the development of capacities that promote student
wellness such as fitness, good health, psycho-social well-being, and sound ethical grounding are also
critical for high-quality learning.
Thus, curriculum, pedagogy, continuous assessment, and student support are the cornerstones for
quality learning. Along with providing suitable resources and infrastructure, such as quality libraries,
classrooms, labs, technology, sports/recreation areas, student discussion spaces, and dining areas, a
number of initiatives will be required to ensure that learning environments are engaging and
supportive, and enable all students to succeed.

12.2. First, in order to promote creativity, institutions and faculty will have the autonomy to innovate
on matters of curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment within a broad framework of higher education
qualifications that ensures consistency across institutions and programmes and across the ODL,
online, and traditional ‘in-class’ modes. Accordingly, curriculum and pedagogy will be designed by
institutions and motivated faculty to ensure a stimulating and engaging learning experience for all
students, and continuous formative assessment will be used to further the goals of each programme.
All assessment systems shall also be decided by the HEI, including those that lead to final
certification. The Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) will be revised for instilling innovation and
flexibility. HEIs shall move to a criterion-based grading system that assesses student achievement
based on the learning goals for each programme, making the system fairer and outcomes more
comparable. HEIs shall also move away from high-stakes examinations towards more continuous and
comprehensive evaluation.

12.3. Second, each institution will integrate its academic plans ranging from curricular improvement
to quality of classroom transaction - into its larger Institutional Development Plan (IDP). Each
institution will be committed to the holistic development of students and create strong internal
systems for supporting diverse student cohorts in academic and social domains both inside and
outside formal academic interactions in the classroom. For example, all HEIs will have mechanisms
and opportunities for funding of topic-centred clubs and activities organized by students with the help
of faculty and other experts as needed, such as clubs and events dedicated to science, mathematics,
poetry, language, literature, debate, music, sports, etc. Over time, such activities could be
incorporated into the curriculum once appropriate faculty expertise and campus student demand is
developed. Faculty will have the capacity and training to be able to approach students not just as
teachers, but also as mentors and guides.

12.4. Third, students from socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds require encouragement
and support to make a successful transition to higher education. Universities and colleges will thus be
required to set up high-quality support centres and will be given adequate funds and academic
resources to carry this out effectively. There will also be professional academic and career
counselling available to all students, as well as counsellors to ensure physical, psychological and
emotional well-being.

12.5. Fourth, ODL and online education provide a natural path to increase access to quality higher
education. In order to leverage its potential completely, ODL will be renewed through concerted,
evidence-based efforts towards expansion while ensuring adherence to clearly articulated standards of
quality. ODL programmes will aim to be equivalent to the highest quality in-class programmes
available. Norms, standards, and guidelines for systemic development, regulation, and accreditation
of ODL will be prepared, and a framework for quality of ODL that will be recommendatory for all
HEIs will be developed.

12.6. Finally, all programmes, courses, curricula, and pedagogy across subjects, including those in-
class, online, and in ODL modes as well as student support will aim to achieve global standards of
quality.
Internationalization

12.7. The various initiatives mentioned above will also help in having larger numbers of international
students studying in India, and provide greater mobility to students in India who may wish to visit,
study at, transfer credits to, or carry out research at institutions abroad, and vice versa. Courses and
programmes in subjects, such as Indology, Indian languages, AYUSH systems of medicine, yoga,
arts, music, history, culture, and modern India, internationally relevant curricula in the sciences,
social sciences, and beyond, meaningful opportunities for social engagement, quality residential
facilities and on-campus support, etc. will be fostered to attain this goal of global quality standards,
attract greater numbers of international students, and achieve the goal of ‘internationalization at
home’.

12.8. India will be promoted as a global study destination providing premium education at affordable
costs thereby helping to restore its role as a Vishwa Guru. An International Students Office at each
HEI hosting foreign students will be set up to coordinate all matters relating to welcoming and
supporting students arriving from abroad. Research/teaching collaborations and faculty/student
exchanges with high-quality foreign institutions will be facilitated, and relevant mutually beneficial
MOUs with foreign countries will be signed. High performing Indian universities will be encouraged
to set up campuses in other countries, and similarly, selected universities e.g., those from among the
top 100 universities in the world will be facilitated to operate in India. A legislative framework
facilitating such entry will be put in place, and such universities will be given special dispensation
regarding regulatory, governance, and content norms on par with other autonomous institutions of
India. Furthermore, research collaboration and student exchanges between Indian institutions and
global institutions will be promoted through special efforts. Credits acquired in foreign universities
will be permitted, where appropriate as per the requirements of each HEI, to be counted for the award
of a degree.
Student Activity and Participation

12.9. Students are the prime stakeholders in the education system. Vibrant campus life is essential for
high-quality teaching-learning processes. Towards this end, students will be given plenty of
opportunities for participation in sports, culture/arts clubs, eco-clubs, activity clubs, community
service projects, etc. In every education institution, there shall be counselling systems for handling
stress and emotional adjustments. Furthermore, a systematized arrangement shall be created to
provide the requisite support to students from rural backgrounds, including increasing hostel facilities
as needed. All HEIs will ensure quality medical facilities for all students in their institutions.
Financial support for students

12.10. Financial assistance to students shall be made available through various measures. Efforts will
be made to incentivize the merit of students belonging to SC, ST, OBC, and other SEDGs. The
National Scholarship Portal will be expanded to support, foster, and track the progress of students
receiving scholarships. Private HEIs will be encouraged to offer larger numbers of free ships and
scholarships to their students.


13. Motivated, Energized, and Capable Faculty

13.1. The most important factor in the success of higher education institutions is the quality and
engagement of its faculty. Acknowledging the criticality of faculty in achieving the goals of higher
education, various initiatives have been introduced in the past several years to systematize
recruitment and career progression, and to ensure equitable representation from various groups in the
hiring of faculty. Compensation levels of permanent faculty in public institutions have also been
increased substantially. Various initiatives have also been taken towards providing faculty with
professional development opportunities. However, despite these various improvements in the status
of the academic profession, faculty motivation in terms of teaching, research, and service in HEIs
remains far lower than the desired level. The various factors that lie behind low faculty motivation
levels must be addressed to ensure that each faculty member is happy, enthusiastic, engaged, and
motivated towards advancing her/his students, institution, and profession. To this end, the policy
recommends the following initiatives to achieve the best, motivated, and capable faculty in HEIs.

13.2. As the most basic step, all HEIs will be equipped with the basic infrastructure and facilities,
including clean drinking water, clean working toilets, blackboards, offices, teaching supplies,
libraries, labs, and pleasant classroom spaces and campuses. Every classroom shall have access to the
latest educational technology that enables better learning experiences.

13.3. Teaching duties also will not be excessive, and student-teacher ratios not too high, so that the
activity of teaching remains pleasant and there is adequate time for interaction with students,
conducting research, and other university activities. Faculty will be appointed to individual
institutions and generally not be transferable across institutions so that they may feel truly invested in,
connected to, and committed to their institution and community.

13.4. Faculty will be given the freedom to design their own curricular and pedagogical approaches
within the approved framework, including textbook and reading material selections, assignments, and
assessments. Empowering the faculty to conduct innovative teaching, research, and service as they
see best will be a key motivator and enabler for them to do truly outstanding, creative work.

13.5. Excellence will be further incentivized through appropriate rewards, promotions, recognitions,
and movement into institutional leadership. Meanwhile, faculty not delivering on basic norms will be
held accountable.

13.6. In keeping with the vision of autonomous institutions empowered to drive excellence, HEIs will
have clearly defined, independent, and transparent processes and criteria for faculty recruitment.
Whereas the current recruitment process will be continued, a ‘tenure-track’ i.e., suitable probation
period shall be put in place to further ensure excellence. There shall be a fast-track promotion system
for recognizing high impact research and contribution. A system of multiple parameters for proper
performance assessment, for the purposes of ‘tenure’ i.e., confirmed employment after probation,
promotion, salary increases, recognitions, etc., including peer and student reviews, innovations in
teaching and pedagogy, quality and impact of research, professional development activities, and other
forms of service to the institution and the community, shall be developed by each HEI and clearly
enunciated in it’s Institutional Development Plan (IDP).

13.7. The presence of outstanding and enthusiastic institutional leaders that cultivate excellence and
innovation is the need of the hour. Outstanding and effective institutional leadership is extremely
important for the success of an institution and of its faculty. Excellent faculty with high academic and
service credentials as well as demonstrated leadership and management skills will be identified early
and trained through a ladder of leadership positions. Leadership positions shall not remain vacant, but
rather an overlapping time period during transitions in leadership shall be the norm to ensure the
smooth running of institutions. Institutional leaders will aim to create a culture of excellence that will
motivate and incentivize outstanding and innovative teaching, research, institutional service, and
community outreach from faculty members and all HEI leaders.


14. Equity and Inclusion in Higher Education


14.1. Entry into quality higher education can open a vast array of possibilities that can lift both
individuals as well as communities out of the cycles of disadvantage. For this reason, making quality
higher education opportunities available to all individuals must be among the highest priorities. This
Policy envisions ensuring equitable access to quality education to all students, with a special
emphasis on SEDGs.

14.2. The dynamics and also many of the reasons for exclusion of SEDGs from the education system
are common across school and higher education sectors. Therefore, the approach to equity and
inclusion must be common across school and higher education. Furthermore, there must be continuity
across the stages to ensure sustainable reform. Thus, the policy initiatives required to meet the goals
of equity and inclusion in higher education must be read in conjunction with those for school
education.

14.3. There are certain facets of exclusion, that are particular to or substantially more intense in
higher education. These must be addressed specifically, and include lack of knowledge of higher
education opportunities, economic opportunity cost of pursuing higher education, financial
constraints, admission processes, geographical and language barriers, poor employability potential of
many higher education programmes, and lack of appropriate student support mechanisms.

14.4. For this purpose, additional actions that are specific to higher education shall be adopted by all
Governments and HEIs:
14.4.1. Steps to be taken by Governments
(a) Earmark suitable Government funds for the education of SEDGs
(b) Set clear targets for higher GER for SEDGs
(c) Enhance gender balance in admissions to HEIs
(d) Enhance access by establishing more high-quality HEIs in aspirational districts and Special
Education Zones containing larger numbers of SEDGs
(e) Develop and support high-quality HEIs that teach in local/Indian languages or bilingually
(f) Provide more financial assistance and scholarships to SEDGs in both public and private HEIs
(g) Conduct outreach programmes on higher education opportunities and scholarships among
SEDGs
(h) Develop and support technology tools for better participation and learning outcomes.
14.4.2. Steps to be taken by all HEIs
(a) Mitigate opportunity costs and fees for pursuing higher education
(b) Provide more financial assistance and scholarships to socio-economically disadvantaged students
(c) Conduct outreach on higher education opportunities and scholarships
(d) Make admissions processes more inclusive
(e) Make curriculum more inclusive
(f) Increase employability potential of higher education programmes
(g) Develop more degree courses taught in Indian languages and bilingually
(h) Ensure all buildings and facilities are wheelchair-accessible and disabled-friendly
(i) Develop bridge courses for students that come from disadvantaged educational backgrounds
(j) Provide socio-emotional and academic support and mentoring for all such students through
suitable counselling and mentoring programmes
(k) Ensure sensitization of faculty, counsellor, and students on gender-identity issue and its
inclusion in all aspects of the HEI, including curricula
(l) Strictly enforce all no-discrimination and anti-harassment rules
(m) Develop Institutional Development Plans that contain specific plans for action on increasing
participation from SEDGs, including but not limited to the above items.


15. Teacher Education

15.1. Teacher education is vital in creating a pool of schoolteachers that will shape the next
generation. Teacher preparation is an activity that requires multidisciplinary perspectives and
knowledge, formation of dispositions and values, and development of practice under the best
mentors. Teachers must be grounded in Indian values, languages, knowledge, ethos, and traditions
including tribal traditions, while also being well-versed in the latest advances in education and
pedagogy.

15.2. According to the Justice J. S. Verma Commission (2012) constituted by the Supreme Court, a
majority of stand-alone TEIs - over 10,000 in number are not even attempting serious teacher
education but are essentially selling degrees for a price. Regulatory efforts so far have neither been
able to curb the malpractices in the system, nor enforce basic standards for quality, and in fact have
had the negative effect of curbing the growth of excellence and innovation in the sector. The sector
and its regulatory system are, therefore, in urgent need of revitalization through radical action, in
order to raise standards and restore integrity, credibility, efficacy, and high quality to the teacher
education system.

15.3. In order to improve and reach the levels of integrity and credibility required to restore the
prestige of the teaching profession, the Regulatory System shall be empowered to take stringent
action against substandard and dysfunctional teacher education institutions (TEIs) that do not meet
basic educational criteria, after giving one year for remedy of the breaches. By 2030, only
educationally sound, multidisciplinary, and integrated teacher education programmes shall be in
force.

15.4. As teacher education requires multidisciplinary inputs, and education in high-quality content as
well as pedagogy, all teacher education programmes must be conducted within composite
multidisciplinary institutions. To this end, all multidisciplinary universities and colleges - will aim to
establish, education departments which, besides carrying out cutting-edge research in various aspects
of education, will also run B.Ed. programmes, in collaboration with other departments such as
psychology, philosophy, sociology, neuroscience, Indian languages, arts, music, history, literature,
physical education, science and mathematics. Moreover, all stand-alone TEIs will be required to
convert to multidisciplinary institutions by 2030, since they will have to offer the 4-year integrated
teacher preparation programme.

15.5. The 4-year integrated B.Ed. offered by such multidisciplinary HEIs will, by 2030, become the
minimal degree qualification for school teachers. The 4-year integrated B.Ed. will be a dual-major
holistic Bachelor’s degree, in Education as well as a specialized subject such as a language, history,
music, mathematics, computer science, chemistry, economics, art, physical education, etc. Beyond
the teaching of cutting-edge pedagogy, the teacher education will include grounding in sociology,
history, science, psychology, early childhood care and education, foundational literacy and numeracy,
knowledge of India and its values/ethos/art/traditions, and more. The HEI offering the 4-year
integrated B.Ed. may also run a 2-year B.Ed., for students who have already received a Bachelor’s
degree in a specialized subject. A 1-year B.Ed. may also be offered for candidates who have received
a 4-year undergraduate degree in a specialized subject. Scholarships for meritorious students will be
established for the purpose of attracting outstanding candidates to the 4-year, 2-year, and 1-year
B.Ed. programmes.

15.6. HEIs offering teacher education programmes will ensure the availability of a range of experts in
education and related disciplines as well as specialized subjects. Each higher education institution
will have a network of government and private schools to work closely with, where potential teachers
will student-teach along with participating in other activities such as community service, adult and
vocational education, etc.

15.7. In order to maintain uniform standards for teacher education, the admission to pre-service
teacher preparation programmes shall be through suitable subject and aptitude tests conducted by the
National Testing Agency, and shall be standardized keeping in view the linguistic and cultural
diversity of the country.

15.8. The faculty profile in Departments of Education will necessarily aim to be diverse and but
teaching/field/research experience will be highly valued. Faculty with training in areas of social
sciences that are directly relevant to school education e.g., psychology, child development,
linguistics, sociology, philosophy, economics, and political science as well as from science education,
mathematics education, social science education, and language education programmes will be
attracted and retained in teacher education institutions, to strengthen multidisciplinary education of
teachers and provide rigour in conceptual development.

15.9. All fresh Ph.D. entrants, irrespective of discipline, will be required to take credit-based courses
in teaching/education/pedagogy/writing related to their chosen Ph.D subject during their doctoral
training period. Exposure to pedagogical practices, designing curriculum, credible evaluation
systems, communication, and so on will be ensured since many research scholars will go on to
become faculty or public representatives/communicators of their chosen disciplines. Ph.D students
will also have a minimum number of hours of actual teaching experience gathered through teaching
assistantships and other means. Ph.D. programmes at universities around the country will be re-
oriented for this purpose.

15.10. In-service continuous professional development for college and university teachers will
continue through the existing institutional arrangements and ongoing initiatives; these will be
strengthened and substantially expanded to meet the needs of enriched teaching-learning processes
for quality education. The use of technology platforms such as SWAYAM/DIKSHA for online
training of teachers will be encouraged, so that standardized training programmes can be
administered to large numbers of teachers within a short span of time.

15.11. A National Mission for Mentoring shall be established, with a large pool of outstanding
senior/retired faculty – including those with the ability to teach in Indian languages – who would be
willing to provide short and long-term mentoring/professional support to university/college teachers.

16. Reimagining Vocational Education

16.1. The 12th Five-Year Plan (2012–2017) estimated that only a very small percentage of the Indian
workforce in the age group of 19–24 (less than 5%) received formal vocational education Whereas in
countries such as the USA the number is 52%, in Germany 75%, and South Korea it is as high as
96%. These numbers only underline the urgency of the need to hasten the spread of vocational
education in India.

16.2. One of the primary reasons for the small numbers of students receiving vocational education is
the fact that vocational education has in the past focused largely on Grades 11–12 and on dropouts in
Grade 8 and upwards. Moreover, students passing out from Grades 11–12 with vocational subjects
often did not have well-defined pathways to continue with their chosen vocations in higher education.
The admission criteria for general higher education were also not designed to provide openings to
students who had vocational education qualifications, leaving them at a disadvantage relative to their
compatriots from ‘mainstream’ or ‘academic’ education. This led to a complete lack of vertical
mobility for students from the vocational education stream, an issue that has only been addressed
recently through the announcement of the National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) in 2013.

16.3. Vocational education is perceived to be inferior to mainstream education and meant largely for
students who are unable to cope with the latter. This is a perception that affects the choices students
make. It is a serious concern that can only be dealt with by a complete re-imagination of how
vocational education is offered to students in the future.

16.4. This policy aims to overcome the social status hierarchy associated with vocational education
and requires integration of vocational education programmes into mainstream education in all
education institutions in a phased manner. Beginning with vocational exposure at early ages in
middle and secondary school, quality vocational education will be integrated smoothly into higher
education. It will ensure that every child learns at least one vocation and is exposed to several more.
This would lead to emphasizing the dignity of labour and importance of various vocations involving
/Indian arts and artisanship.

16.5. By 2025, at least 50% of learners through the school and higher education system shall have
exposure to vocational education, for which a clear action plan with targets and timelines will be
developed. This is in alignment with Sustainable Development Goal 4.4 and will help to realize the
full potential of India’s demographic dividend. The number of students in vocational education will
be considered while arriving at the GER targets. The development of vocational capacities will go
hand-in-hand with the development of ‘academic’ or other capacities. Vocational education will be
integrated in the educational offerings of all secondary schools in a phased manner over the next
decade. Towards this, secondary schools will also collaborate with ITIs, polytechnics, local industry,
etc. Skill labs will also be set up and created in the schools in a hub and spoke model which will
allow other schools to use the facility. Higher education institutions will offer vocational education
either on their own or in partnership with industry and NGOs. The B.Voc. degrees introduced in 2013
will continue to exist, but vocational courses will also be available to students enrolled in all other
Bachelor’s degree programmes, including the 4-year multidisciplinary Bachelor’s programmes. HEIs
will also be allowed to conduct short-term certificate courses in various skills including soft skills.
‘Lok Vidya’, i.e., important vocational knowledge developed in India, will be made accessible to
students through integration into vocational education courses. The possibility of offering vocational
courses through ODL mode will also be explored.

16.6. Vocational education will be integrated into all school and higher education institutions in a
phased manner over the next decade. Focus areas for vocational education will be chosen based on
skills gap analysis and mapping of local opportunities. MHRD will constitute a National Committee
for the Integration of Vocational Education (NCIVE), consisting of experts in vocational education
and representatives from across Ministries, in collaboration with industry, to oversee this effort.

16.7. Individual institutions that are early adopters must innovate to find models and practices that
work and then share these with other institutions through mechanisms set up by NCIVE, so as to help
extend the reach of vocational education. Different models of vocational education, and
apprenticeships, will also be experimented by higher education institutions. Incubation centres will be
set up in higher education institutions in partnership with industries.

16.8. The National Skills Qualifications Framework will be detailed further for each discipline
vocation and profession. Further, Indian standards will be aligned with the International Standard
Classification of Occupations maintained by the International Labour Organization. This Framework
will provide the basis for Recognition of Prior Learning. Through this, dropouts from the formal
system will be reintegrated by aligning their practical experience with the relevant level of the
Framework. The credit-based Framework will also facilitate mobility across ‘general’ and vocational
education.

17. Catalysing Quality Academic Research in All Fields through a new National
Research Foundation

17.1. Knowledge creation and research are critical in growing and sustaining a large and vibrant
economy, uplifting society, and continuously inspiring a nation to achieve even greater heights.
Indeed, some of the most prosperous civilizations (such as India, Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Greece)
to the modern era (such as the United States, Germany, Israel, South Korea, and Japan), were/are
strong knowledge societies that attained intellectual and material wealth in large part through
celebrated and fundamental contributions to new knowledge in the realm of science as well as art,
language, and culture that enhanced and uplifted not only their own civilizations but others around
the globe.

17.2. A robust ecosystem of research is perhaps more important than ever with the rapid changes
occurring in the world today, e.g., in the realm of climate change, population dynamics and
management, biotechnology, an expanding digital marketplace, and the rise of machine learning and
artificial intelligence. If India is to become a leader in these disparate areas, and truly achieve the
potential of its vast talent pool to again become a leading knowledge society in the coming years and
decades, the nation will require a significant expansion of its research capabilities and output across
disciplines. Today, the criticality of research is more than ever before, for the economic, intellectual,
societal, environmental, and technological health and progress of a nation.

17.3. Despite this critical importance of research, the research and innovation investment in India is,
at the current time, only 0.69% of GDP as compared to 2.8% in the United States of America, 4.3%
in Israel and 4.2% in South Korea.

17.4. The societal challenges that India needs to address today, such as access for all its citizens to
clean drinking water and sanitation, quality education and healthcare, improved transportation, air
quality, energy, and infrastructure, will require the implementation of approaches and solutions that
are not only informed by top-notch science and technology but are also rooted in a deep
understanding of the social sciences and humanities and the various socio-cultural and environmental
dimensions of the nation. Facing and addressing these challenges will require high-quality
interdisciplinary research across fields that must be done in India and cannot simply be imported; the
ability to conduct one’s own research also enables a country to much more easily import and adapt
relevant research from abroad.

17.5. Furthermore, in addition to their value in solutions to societal problems, any country's identity,
upliftment, spiritual/intellectual satisfaction and creativity is also attained in a major way through its
history, art, language, and culture. Research in the arts and humanities, along with innovations in the
sciences and social sciences, are, therefore, extremely important for the progress and enlightened
nature of a nation.

17.6. Research and innovation at education institutions in India, particularly those that are engaged in
higher education, is critical. Evidence from the world’s best universities throughout history shows
that the best teaching and learning processes at the higher education level occur in environments
where there is also a strong culture of research and knowledge creation; conversely, much of the very
best research in the world has occurred in multidisciplinary university settings.

17.7. India has a long historical tradition of research and knowledge creation, in disciplines ranging
from science and mathematics to art and literature to phonetics and languages to medicine and
agriculture. This needs to be further strengthened to make India lead research and innovation in the
21st century, as a strong and enlightened knowledge society and one of the three largest economies in
the world.

17.8. Thus, this Policy envisions a comprehensive approach to transforming the quality and quantity
of research in India. This includes definitive shifts in school education to a more play and discovery-
based style of learning with emphasis on the scientific method and critical thinking. This includes
career counselling in schools towards identifying student interests and talents, promoting research in
universities, the multidisciplinary nature of all HEIs and the emphasis on holistic education, the
inclusion of research and internships in the undergraduate curriculum, faculty career management
systems that give due weightage to research, and the governance and regulatory changes that
encourage an environment of research and innovation. All of these aspects are extremely critical for
developing a research mindset in the country.

17.9. To build on these various elements in a synergistic manner, and to thereby truly grow and
catalyze quality research in the nation, this policy envisions the establishment of a National Research
Foundation (NRF). The overarching goal of the NRF will be to enable a culture of research to
permeate through our universities. In particular, the NRF will provide a reliable base of merit-based
but equitable peer-reviewed research funding, helping to develop a culture of research in the country
through suitable incentives for and recognition of outstanding research, and by undertaking major
initiatives to seed and grow research at State Universities and other public institutions where research
capability is currently limited. The NRF will competitively fund research in all disciplines.
Successful research will be recognized, and where relevant, implemented through close linkages with
governmental agencies as well as with industry and private/philanthropic organizations.

17.10. Institutions that currently fund research at some level, such as the Department of Science and
Technology (DST), Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), Department of Bio-Technology (DBT),
Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR), Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Indian
Council of Historical Research (ICHR), and University Grants Commission (UGC), as well as
various private and philanthropic organizations, will continue to independently fund research
according to their priorities and needs. However, NRF will carefully coordinate with other funding
agencies and will work with science, engineering, and other academies to ensure synergy of purpose
and avoid duplication of efforts. The NRF will be governed, independently of the government, by a
rotating Board of Governors consisting of the very best researchers and innovators across fields.

17.11. The primary activities of the NRF will be to:
(a) fund competitive, peer-reviewed grant proposals of all types and across all disciplines;
(b) seed, grow, and facilitate research at academic institutions, particularly at universities and
colleges where research is currently in a nascent stage, through mentoring of such
institutions;
(c) act as a liaison between researchers and relevant branches of government as well as industry,
so that research scholars are constantly made aware of the most urgent national research
issues, and so that policymakers are constantly made aware of the latest research
breakthroughs; so as to allow breakthroughs to be optimally brought into policy and/or
implementation; and
(d) recognise outstanding research and progress

18. Transforming the Regulatory System of Higher Education

18.1. Regulation of higher education has been too heavy-handed for decades; too much has been
attempted to be regulated with too little effect. The mechanistic and disempowering nature of the
regulatory system has been rife with very basic problems, such as heavy concentrations of power
within a few bodies, conflicts of interest among these bodies, and a resulting lack of accountability.
The regulatory system is in need of a complete overhaul in order to re-energize the higher education
sector and enable it to thrive.

18.2. To address the above-mentioned issues, the regulatory system of higher education will ensure
that the distinct functions of regulation, accreditation, funding, and academic standard setting will be
performed by distinct, independent, and empowered bodies. This is considered essential to create
checks-and-balances in the system, minimize conflicts of interest, and eliminate concentrations of
power. To ensure that the four institutional structures carrying out these four essential functions work
independently yet at the same time and work in synergy towards common goals. These four
structures will be set up as four independent verticals within one umbrella institution, the Higher
Education Commission of India (HECI).

18.3. The first vertical of HECI will be the National Higher Education Regulatory Council (NHERC).
It will function as the common, single point regulator for the higher education sector including
teacher education and excluding medical and legal education, thus eliminating the duplication and
disjunction of regulatory efforts by the multiple regulatory agencies that exist at the current time. It
will require a relook and repealing of existing Acts and restructuring of various existing regulatory
bodies to enable this single point regulation. NHERC will be set up to regulate in a ‘light but tight’
and facilitative manner, meaning that a few important matters particularly financial probity, good
governance, and the full online and offline public self-disclosure of all finances, audits, procedures,
infrastructure, faculty/staff, courses, and educational outcomes will be very effectively regulated.
This information will have to be made available and kept updated and accurate by all higher
education institutions on a public website maintained by NHERC and on the institutions’ websites.
Any complaints or grievances from stakeholders and others arising out of the information placed in
public domain shall be adjudicated by NHERC. Feedback from randomly selected students including
differently-abled students at each HEI will be solicited online to ensure valuable input at regular
intervals.

18.4. The primary mechanism to enable such regulation will be accreditation. The second vertical of
HECI will, therefore, be a ‘meta-accrediting body’, called the National Accreditation Council (NAC).
Accreditation of institutions will be based primarily on basic norms, public self-disclosure, good
governance, and outcomes, and it will be carried out by an independent ecosystem of accrediting
institutions supervised and overseen by NAC. The task to function as a recognized accreditor shall be
awarded to an appropriate number of institutions by NAC. In the short term, a robust system of
graded accreditation shall be established, which will specify phased benchmarks for all HEIs to
achieve set levels of quality, self-governance, and autonomy. In turn, all HEIs will aim, through their
Institutional Development Plans (IDPs), to attain the highest level of accreditation over the next 15
years, and thereby eventually aim to function as self-governing degree-granting institutions/clusters.
In the long run, accreditation will become a binary process, as per the extant global practice.

18.5. The third vertical of HECI will be the Higher Education Grants Council (HEGC), which will
carry out funding and financing of higher education based on transparent criteria, including the IDPs
prepared by the institutions and the progress made on their implementation. HEGC will be entrusted
with the disbursement of scholarships and developmental funds for launching new focus areas and
expanding quality programme offerings at HEIs across disciplines and fields.

18.6. The fourth vertical of HECI will be the General Education Council (GEC), which will frame
expected learning outcomes for higher education programmes, also referred to as ‘graduate
attributes’. A National Higher Education Qualification Framework (NHEQF) will be formulated by
the GEC and it shall be in sync with the National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) to ease
the integration of vocational education into higher education. Higher education qualifications leading
to a degree/diploma/certificate shall be described by the NHEQF in terms of such learning outcomes.
In addition, the GEC shall set up facilitative norms for issues, such as credit transfer, equivalence,
etc., through the NHEQF. The GEC will be mandated to identify specific skills that students must
acquire during their academic programmes, with the aim of preparing well-rounded learners with 21
st
century skills.

18.7. The professional councils, such as the Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR),
Veterinary Council of India (VCI), National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE), Council of
Architecture (CoA), National Council for Vocational Education and Training (NCVET) etc., will act
as Professional Standard Setting Bodies (PSSBs). They will play a key role in the higher education
system and will be invited to be members of the GEC. These bodies, after restructuring as PSSBs,
will continue to draw the curricula, lay down academic standards and coordinate between teaching,
research and extension of their domain/discipline, as members of the GEC. As members of the GEC,
they would help in specifying the curriculum framework, within which HEIs may prepare their own
curricula. Thus, PSSBs would also set the standards or expectations in particular fields of learning
and practice while having no regulatory role. All HEIs will decide how their educational programmes
respond to these standards, among other considerations, and would also be able to reach out for
support from these standard-setting bodies or PSSBs, if needed.

18.8. Such a system architecture will ensure the principle of functional separation by eliminating
conflicts of interests between different roles. It will also aim to empower HEIs, while ensuring that
the few key essential matters are given due attention. Responsibility and accountability shall devolve
to the HEIs concomitantly. No distinction in such expectations shall be made between public and
private HEIs.

18.9. Such a transformation will require existing structures and institutions to reinvent themselves
and undergo an evolution of sorts. The separation of functions would mean that each vertical within
HECI would take on a new, single role which is relevant, meaningful, and important in the new
regulatory scheme.

18.10. The functioning of all the independent verticals for Regulation (NHERC), Accreditation
(NAC), Funding (HEGC), and Academic Standard Setting (GEC) and the overarching autonomous
umbrella body (HECI) itself will be based on transparent public disclosure, and use technology
extensively to reduce human interface to ensure efficiency and transparency in their work. The
underlying principle will be that of a faceless and transparent regulatory intervention using
technology. Strict compliance measures with stringent action, including penalties for false disclosure
of mandated information, will be ensured so that Higher Education Institutions are conforming to the
basic minimum norms and standards. HECI itself will be resolving disputes among the four verticals.
Each vertical in HECI will be an independent body consisting of persons having high expertise in the
relevant areas along with integrity, commitment, and a demonstrated track record of public service.
HECI itself will be a small, independent body of eminent public-spirited experts in higher education,
which will oversee and monitor the integrity and effective functioning of HECI. Suitable mechanisms
will be created within HECI to carry out its functions, including adjudication.

18.11. Setting up new quality HEIs will also be made far easier by the regulatory regime, while
ensuring with great effectiveness that these are set up with the spirit of public service and with due
financial backing for long-term stability. HEIs performing exceptionally well will be helped by
Central and State governments to expand their institutions, and thereby attain larger numbers of
students and faculty as well as disciplines and programmes. Public Philanthropic Partnership models
for HEIs may also be piloted with the aim to further expand access to high-quality higher education.
Curbing Commercialization of Education

18.12. Multiple mechanisms with checks and balances will combat and stop the commercialization of
higher education. This will be a key priority of the regulatory system. All education institutions will
be held to similar standards of audit and disclosure as a ‘not for profit’ entity. Surpluses, if any, will
be reinvested in the educational sector. There will be transparent public disclosure of all these
financial matters with recourse to grievance-handling mechanisms to the general public. The
accreditation system developed by NAC will provide a complementary check on this system, and
NHERC will consider this as one of the key dimensions of its regulatory objective.

18.13. All HEIs - public and private - shall be treated on par within this regulatory regime. The
regulatory regime shall encourage private philanthropic efforts in education. There will be common
national guidelines for all legislative Acts that will form private HEIs. These common minimal
guidelines will enable all such Acts to establish private HEIs, thus enabling common standards for
private and public HEIs. These common guidelines will cover Good Governance, Financial Stability
& Security, Educational Outcomes, and Transparency of Disclosures.

18.14. Private HEIs having a philanthropic and public-spirited intent will be encouraged through a
progressive regime of fees determination. Transparent mechanisms for fixing of fees with an upper
limit, for different types of institutions depending on their accreditation, will be developed so that
individual institutions are not adversely affected. This will empower private HEIs to set fees for their
programmes independently, though within the laid-out norms and the broad applicable regulatory
mechanism. Private HEIs will be encouraged to offer freeships and scholarships in significant
numbers to their students. All fees and charges set by private HEIs will be transparently and fully
disclosed, and there shall be no arbitrary increases in these fees/charges during the period of
enrolment of any student. This fee determining mechanism will ensure reasonable recovery of cost
while ensuring that HEIs discharge their social obligations.

19. Effective Governance and Leadership for Higher Education Institutions

19.1. It is effective governance and leadership that enables the creation of a culture of excellence and
innovation in higher education institutions. The common feature of all world-class institutions
globally including India has indeed been the existence of strong self-governance and outstanding
merit-based appointments of institutional leaders.

19.2. Through a suitable system of graded accreditation and graded autonomy, and in a phased
manner over a period of 15 years, all HEIs in India will aim to become independent self-governing
institutions pursuing innovation and excellence. Measures will be taken at all HEIs to ensure
leadership of the highest quality and promote an institutional culture of excellence. Upon receiving
the appropriate graded accreditations that deem the institution ready for such a move, a Board of
Governors (BoG) shall be established consisting of a group of highly qualified, competent, and
dedicated individuals having proven capabilities and a strong sense of commitment to the institution.
The BoG of an institution will be empowered to govern the institution free of any external
interference, make all appointments including that of head of the institution, and take all decisions
regarding governance. There shall be overarching legislation that will supersede any contravening
provisions of other earlier legislation and would provide for constitution, appointment, modalities of
functioning, rules and regulations, and the roles and responsibilities of the BoG. New members of the
Board shall be identified by an expert committee appointed by the Board; and the selection of new
members shall be carried out by the BoG itself. Equity considerations will also be taken care of while
selecting the members. It is envisaged that all HEIs will be incentivized, supported, and mentored
during this process, and shall aim to become autonomous and have such an empowered BoG by 2035.

19.3. The BoG shall be responsible and accountable to the stakeholders through transparent self-
disclosures of all relevant records. It will be responsible for meeting all regulatory guidelines
mandated by HECI through the National Higher Education Regulatory Council (NHERC).

19.4. All leadership positions and Heads of institutions will be offered to persons with high academic
qualifications and demonstrated administrative and leadership capabilities along with abilities to
manage complex situations. Leaders of an HEI will demonstrate strong alignment to Constitutional
values and the overall vision of the institution, along with attributes such as a strong social
commitment, belief in teamwork, pluralism, ability to work with diverse people, and a positive
outlook. The selection shall be carried out by the BoG through a rigorous, impartial, merit-based, and
competency-based process led by an Eminent Expert Committee (EEC) constituted by the BoG.
While stability of tenure is important to ensure the development of a suitable culture, at the same time
leadership succession will be planned with care to ensure that good practices that define an
institution’s processes do not end due to a change in leadership; leadership changes will come with
sufficient overlaps, and not remain vacant, in order to ensure smooth transitions. Outstanding leaders
will be identified and developed early, working their way through a ladder of leadership positions.

19.5. While being provided with adequate funding, legislative enablement, and autonomy in a phased
manner, all HEIs, in turn, will display commitment to institutional excellence, engagement with their
local communities, and the highest standards of financial probity and accountability. Each institution
will make a strategic Institutional Development Plan on the basis of which institutions will develop
initiatives, assess their own progress, and reach the goals set therein, which could then become the
basis for further public funding. The IDP shall be prepared with the joint participation of Board
members, institutional leaders, faculty, students, and staff.