Part III. OTHER KEY AREAS OF FOCUS

20. Professional Education

20.1. Preparation of professionals must involve an education in the ethic and importance of public
purpose, an education in the discipline, and an education for practice. It must centrally involve critical
and interdisciplinary thinking, discussion, debate, research, and innovation. For this to be achieved,
professional education should not take place in the isolation of one's specialty.

20.2. Professional education thus becomes an integral part of the overall higher education system.
Stand-alone agricultural universities, legal universities, health science universities, technical
universities, and stand-alone institutions in other fields, shall aim to become multidisciplinary
institutions offering holistic and multidisciplinary education. All institutions offering either
professional or general education will aim to organically evolve into institutions/clusters offering
both seamlessly, and in an integrated manner by 2030.

20.3. Agricultural education with allied disciplines will be revived. Although Agricultural
Universities comprise approximately 9% of all universities in the country, enrolment in agriculture
and allied sciences is less than 1% of all enrolment in higher education. Both capacity and quality of
agriculture and allied disciplines must be improved in order to increase agricultural productivity
through better skilled graduates and technicians, innovative research, and market-based extension
linked to technologies and practices. The preparation of professionals in agriculture and veterinary
sciences through programmes integrated with general education will be increased sharply. The design
of agricultural education will shift towards developing professionals with the ability to understand
and use local knowledge, traditional knowledge, and emerging technologies while being cognizant of
critical issues such as declining land productivity, climate change, food sufficiency for our growing
population, etc. Institutions offering agricultural education must benefit the local community directly;
one approach could be to set up Agricultural Technology Parks to promote technology incubation and
dissemination and promote sustainable methodologies.

20.4. Legal education needs to be competitive globally, adopting best practices and embracing new
technologies for wider access to and timely delivery of justice. At the same time, it must be informed
and illuminated with Constitutional values of Justice - Social, Economic, and Political - and directed
towards national reconstruction through instrumentation of democracy, rule of law, and human rights.
The curricula for legal studies must reflect socio-cultural contexts along with, in an evidence-based
manner, the history of legal thinking, principles of justice, the practice of jurisprudence, and other
related content appropriately and adequately. State institutions offering law education must consider
offering bilingual education for future lawyers and judges - in English and in the language of the
State in which the institution is situated.

20.5. Healthcare education needs to be re-envisioned so that the duration, structure, and design of the
educational programmes need to match the role requirements that graduates will play. Students will
be assessed at regular intervals on well-defined parameters primarily required for working in primary
care and in secondary hospitals. Given that people exercise pluralistic choices in healthcare, our
healthcare education system must be integrative meaning thereby that all students of allopathic
medical education must have a basic understanding of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani,
Siddha, and Homeopathy (AYUSH), and vice versa. There shall also be a much greater emphasis on
preventive healthcare and community medicine in all forms of healthcare education.

20.6. Technical education includes degree and diploma programmes in, engineering, technology,
management, architecture, town planning, pharmacy, hotel management, catering technology etc.,
which are critical to India’s overall development. There will not only be a greater demand for well-
qualified manpower in these sectors, it will also require closer collaborations between industry and
higher education institutions to drive innovation and research in these fields. Furthermore, influence
of technology on human endeavours is expected to erode the silos between technical education and
other disciplines too. Technical education will, thus, also aim to be offered within multidisciplinary
education institutions and programmes and have a renewed focus on opportunities to engage deeply
with other disciplines. India must also take the lead in preparing professionals in cutting-edge areas
that are fast gaining prominence, such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), 3-D machining, big data
analysis, and machine learning, in addition to genomic studies, biotechnology, nanotechnology,
neuroscience, with important applications to health, environment, and sustainable living that will be
woven into undergraduate education for enhancing the employability of the youth.

21. Adult Education and Lifelong Learning

21.1. The opportunity to attain foundational literacy, obtain an education, and pursue a livelihood
must be viewed as basic rights of every citizen. Literacy and basic education open up whole new
worlds of personal, civic, economic, and lifelong-learning opportunities for individuals that enable
them to progress personally and professionally. At the level of society and the nation, literacy and
basic education are powerful force multipliers which greatly enhance the success of all other
developmental efforts. Worldwide data on nations indicate extremely high correlations between
literacy rates and per capita GDP.

21.2. Meanwhile, being a non-literate member of a community, has innumerable disadvantages,
including the inability to: carry out basic financial transactions; compare the quality/quantity of goods
purchased against the price charged; fill out forms to apply for jobs, loans, services, etc.; comprehend
public circulars and articles in the news media; use conventional and electronic mail to communicate
and conduct business; make use of the internet and other technology to improve one’s life and
profession; comprehend directions and safety directives on the street, on medicines, etc.; help
children with their education; be aware of one’s basic rights and responsibilities as a citizen of India;
appreciate works of literature; and pursue employment in medium or high-productivity sectors that
require literacy. The abilities listed here are an illustrative list of outcomes to be achieved through
adoption of innovative measures for Adult Education.

21.3. Extensive field studies and analyses, both in India and across the world, clearly demonstrate
that volunteerism and community involvement and mobilization are key success factors of adult
literacy programmes, in conjunction with political will, organizational structure, proper planning,
adequate financial support, and high-quality capacity building of educators and volunteers.
Successful literacy programmes result not only in the growth of literacy among adults, but also result
in increased demand for education for all children in the community, as well as greater community
contribution to positive social change. The National Literacy Mission, when it was launched in 1988,
was largely based on the voluntary involvement and support of the people, and resulted in significant
increases in national literacy during the period of 1991–2011, including among women, and also
initiated dialogue and discussions on pertinent social issues of the day.

21.4. Strong and innovative government initiatives for adult education - in particular, to facilitate
community involvement and the smooth and beneficial integration of technology - will be affected as
soon as possible to expedite this all-important aim of achieving 100% literacy.

21.5. First, an outstanding adult education curriculum framework will be developed by a new and
well-supported constituent body of the NCERT that is dedicated to adult education, so as to develop
synergy with and build upon NCERT’s existing expertise in establishing outstanding curricula for
literacy, numeracy, basic education, vocational skills, and beyond. The curriculum framework for
adult education will include at least five types of programmes, each with clearly defined outcomes:
(a) foundational literacy and numeracy; (b) critical life skills (including financial literacy, digital
literacy, commercial skills, health care and awareness, child care and education, and family welfare);(c) vocational skills development (with a view towards obtaining local employment); (d) basic
education (including preparatory, middle, and secondary stage equivalency); and (e) continuing
education (including engaging holistic adult education courses in arts, sciences, technology, culture,
sports, and recreation, as well as other topics of interest or use to local learners, such as more
advanced material on critical life skills). The framework would keep in mind that adults in many
cases will require rather different teaching-learning methods and materials than those designed for
children.

21.6. Second, suitable infrastructure will be ensured so that all interested adults will have access to
adult education and lifelong learning. A key initiative in this direction will be to use schools/ school
complexes after school hours and on weekends and public library spaces for adult education courses
which will be ICT-equipped when possible and for other community engagement and enrichment
activities. The sharing of infrastructure for school, higher, adult, and vocational education, and for
other community and volunteer activities, will be critical for ensuring efficient use of both physical
and human resources as well as for creating synergy among these five types of education and beyond.
For these reasons, Adult Education Centres (AECs) could also be included within other public
institutions such as HEIs, vocational training centres, etc.

21.7. Third, the instructors/educators will be required to deliver the curriculum framework to mature
learners for all five types of adult education as described in the Adult Education Curriculum
Framework. These instructors will be trained by the National, State, and district level resource
support institutions to organize and lead learning activities at Adult Education Centres, as well as
coordinate with volunteer instructors. Qualified community members including from HEIs as part of
each HEI’s mission to engage with their local communities will be encouraged and welcomed to take
a short training course and volunteer, as adult literacy instructors, or to serve as one-on-one volunteer
tutors, and will be recognized for their critical service to the nation. States will also work with NGOs
and other community organizations to enhance efforts towards literacy and adult education.

21.8. Fourth, all efforts will be undertaken to ensure the participation of community members in adult
education. Social workers/counsellors travelling through their communities to track and ensure
participation of non-enrolled students and dropouts will also be requested, during their travels, to
gather data of parents, adolescents, and others interested in adult education opportunities both as
learners and as teachers/tutors. The social workers/counsellors will then connect them with local
Adult Education Centres (AECs). Opportunities for adult education will also be widely publicized,
through advertisements and announcements and through events and initiatives of NGOs and other
local organizations.

21.9. Fifth, improving the availability and accessibility of books is essential to inculcating the habit of
reading within our communities and educational institutions. This Policy recommends that all
communities and educational institutions - schools, colleges, universities and public libraries - will be
strengthened and modernized to ensure an adequate supply of books that cater to the needs and
interests of all students, including persons with disabilities and other differently-abled persons. The
Central and State governments will take steps to ensure that books are made accessible and affordable
to all across the country including socio-economically disadvantaged areas as well as those living in
rural and remote areas. Both public and private sector agencies/institutions will devise strategies to
improve the quality and attractiveness of books published in all Indian languages. Steps will be taken
to enhance online accessibility of library books and further broad basing of digital libraries. For
ensuring vibrant libraries in communities and educational institutions, it will be imperative to make
available adequate library staff and also devise appropriate career pathways and CPD for them. Other
steps will include strengthening all existing libraries, setting up rural libraries and reading rooms in
disadvantaged regions, making widely available reading material in Indian languages, opening
children’s libraries and mobile libraries, establishing social book clubs across India and across
subjects, and fostering greater collaborations between education institutions and libraries.

21.10. Finally, technology will be leveraged to strengthen and even undertake the above initiatives.
Quality technology-based options for adult learning such as apps, online courses/modules, satellite-
based TV channels, online books, and ICT-equipped libraries and Adult Education Centres, etc. willbe developed, through government and philanthropic initiatives as well as through crowd sourcing
and competitions. In many cases, quality adult education could thereby be conducted in an online or
blended mode.


22. Promotion of Indian Languages, Arts, and Culture

22.1. India is a treasure trove of culture, developed over thousands of years and manifested in the
form of arts, works of literature, customs, traditions, linguistic expressions, artefacts, heritage sites,
and more. Crores of people from around the world partake in, enjoy, and benefit from this cultural
wealth daily, in the form of visiting India for tourism, experiencing Indian hospitality, purchasing
India’s handicrafts and handmade textiles, reading the classical literature of India, practicing yoga
and meditation, being inspired by Indian philosophy, participating in India’s unique festivals,
appreciating India’s diverse music and art, and watching Indian films, amongst many other aspects. It
is this cultural and natural wealth that truly makes India, “Incredible !ndia”, as per India’s tourism
slogan. The preservation and promotion of India’s cultural wealth must be considered a high priority
for the country, as it is truly important for the nation’s identity as well as for its economy.

22.2. The promotion of Indian arts and culture is important not only for the nation but also for the
individual. Cultural awareness and expression are among the major competencies considered
important to develop in children, in order to provide them with a sense of identity, belonging, as well
as an appreciation of other cultures and identities. It is through the development of a strong sense and
knowledge of their own cultural history, arts, languages, and traditions that children can build a
positive cultural identity and self-esteem. Thus, cultural awareness and expression are important
contributors both to individual as well as societal well-being.

22.3. The arts form a major medium for imparting culture. The arts - besides strengthening cultural
identity, awareness, and uplifting societies - are well known to enhance cognitive and creative
abilities in individuals and increase individual happiness. The happiness/well-being, cognitive
development, and cultural identity of individuals are important reasons that Indian arts of all kinds
must be offered to students at all levels of education, starting with early childhood care and
education.

22.4. Language, of course, is inextricably linked to art and culture. Different languages ‘see’ the
world differently, and the structure of a language, therefore, determines a native speaker’s perception
of experience. In particular, languages influence the way people of a given culture speak with others,
including with family members, authority figures, peers, and strangers, and influence the tone of
conversation. The tone, perception of experience, and familiarity/‘apnapan’ inherent in
conversations among speakers of a common language are a reflection and record of a culture. Culture
is, thus, encased in our languages. Art, in the form of literature, plays, music, film, etc. cannot be
fully appreciated without language. In order to preserve and promote culture, one must preserve and
promote a culture’s languages.

22.5. Unfortunately, Indian languages have not received their due attention and care, with the country
losing over 220 languages in the last 50 years alone. UNESCO has declared 197 Indian languages as
‘endangered’. Various unscripted languages are particularly in danger of becoming extinct. When
senior member(s) of a tribe or community that speak such languages pass away, these languages often
perish with them; too often, no concerted actions or measures are taken to preserve or record these
rich languages/expressions of culture.

22.6. Moreover, even those languages of India that are not officially on such endangered lists, such as
the 22 languages of Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India, are facing serious difficulties on
many fronts. Teaching and learning of Indian languages need to be integrated with school and higher
education at every level. For languages to remain relevant and vibrant, there must be a steady stream
of high-quality learning and print materials in these languages including textbooks, workbooks,
videos, plays, poems, novels, magazines, etc. Languages must also have consistent official updates to
their vocabularies and dictionaries, widely disseminated, so that the most current issues and concepts
can be effectively discussed in these languages. Enabling such learning materials, print materials, andtranslations of important materials from world languages, and constantly updating vocabularies, are
carried out by countries around the world for languages such as English, French, German, Hebrew,
Korean, and Japanese. However, India has remained quite slow in producing such learning and print
materials and dictionaries to help keep its languages optimally vibrant and current with integrity.

22.7. Additionally, there has been a severe scarcity of skilled language teachers in India, despite
various measures being taken. Language-teaching too must be improved to be more experiential and
to focus on the ability to converse and interact in the language and not just on the literature,
vocabulary, and grammar of the language. Languages must be used more extensively for
conversation and for teaching-learning.

22.8. A number of initiatives to foster languages, arts, and culture in school children have been
discussed in Chapter 4, which include a greater emphasis on music, arts, and crafts throughout all
levels of school; early implementation of the three-language formula to promote multilingualism;
teaching in the home/local language wherever possible; conducting more experiential language
learning; the hiring of outstanding local artists, writers, craftspersons, and other experts as master
instructors in various subjects of local expertise; accurate inclusion of traditional Indian knowledge
including tribal and other local knowledge throughout into the curriculum, across humanities,
sciences, arts, crafts, and sports, whenever relevant; and a much greater flexibility in the curriculum,
especially in secondary schools and in higher education, so that students can choose the ideal balance
among courses for themselves to develop their own creative, artistic, cultural, and academic paths.

22.9. To enable the key latter initiatives, a number of further actions will be taken in tandem at the
higher education level and beyond. First, to develop and teach many of the courses of the type
mentioned above, an excellent team of teachers and faculty will have to be developed. Strong
departments and programmes in Indian languages, comparative literature, creative writing, arts,
music, philosophy, etc. will be launched and developed across the country, and degrees including 4-
year B.Ed. dual degrees will be developed in these subjects. These departments and programmes will,
in particular help to develop a large cadre of high-quality language teachers - as well as teachers of
art, music, philosophy and writing - who will be needed around the country to carry out this Policy.
The NRF will fund quality research in all these areas. Outstanding local artists and craftspersons will
be hired as guest faculty to promote local music, art, languages, and handicraft, and to ensure that
students are aware of the culture and local knowledge where they study. Every higher education
institution and even every school or school complex will aim to have Artist(s)-in-Residence to expose
students to art, creativity, and the rich treasures of the region/country.

22.10. More HEIs, and more programmes in higher education, will use the mother tongue/local
language as a medium of instruction, and/or offer programmes bilingually, in order to increase access
and GER and also to promote the strength, usage, and vibrancy of all Indian languages. Private HEIs
too will be encouraged and incentivized to use Indian languages as medium of instruction and/or
offer bilingual programmes. Four-year B.Ed. dual degree programmes offered bilingually will also
help, e.g. in training cadres of science and mathematics teachers to teach science bilingually at
schools across the country.

22.11. High-quality programmes and degrees in Translation and Interpretation, Art and Museum
Administration, Archaeology, Artefact Conservation, Graphic Design, and Web Design within the
higher education system will also be created. In order to preserve and promote its art and culture,
develop high-quality materials in various Indian languages, conserve artefacts, develop highly
qualified individuals to curate and run museums and heritage or tourist sites, thereby also vastly
strengthening the tourism industry.

22.12. The Policy recognizes that the knowledge of the rich diversity of India should be imbibed first
hand by learners. This would mean including simple activities, like touring by students to different
parts of the country, which will not only give a boost to tourism but will also lead to an understanding
and appreciation of diversity, culture, traditions and knowledge of different parts of India. Towards
this direction under ‘Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat’, 100 tourist destinations in the country will be
identified where educational institutions will send students to study these destinations and theirhistory, scientific contributions, traditions, indigenous literature and knowledge, etc., as a part of
augmenting their knowledge about these areas.

22.13. Creating such programmes and degrees in higher education, across the arts, languages, and
humanities, will also come with expanded high-quality opportunities for employment that can make
effective use of these qualifications. There are already hundreds of Academies, museums, art
galleries, and heritage sites in dire need of qualified individuals for their effective functioning. As
positions are filled with suitably qualified candidates, and further artefacts are procured and
conserved, additional museums, including virtual museums/e-museums, galleries, and heritage sites
may contribute to the conservation of our heritage as well as to India’s tourism industry.

22.14. India will also urgently expand its translation and interpretation efforts in order to make high-
quality learning materials and other important written and spoken material available to the public in
various Indian and foreign languages. For this, an Indian Institute of Translation and Interpretation
(IITI) will be established. Such an institute would provide a truly important service for the country, as
well as employ numerous multilingual language and subject experts, and experts in translation and
interpretation, which will help to promote all Indian languages. The IITI shall also make extensive
use of technology to aid in its translation and interpretation efforts. The IITI could naturally grow
with time, and be housed in multiple locations including in HEIs to facilitate collaborations with
other research departments as demand and the number of qualified candidates grows.

22.15. Due to its vast and significant contributions and literature across genres and subjects, its
cultural significance, and its scientific nature, rather than being restricted to single-stream Sanskrit
Pathshalas and Universities, Sanskrit will be mainstreamed with strong offerings in school - including
as one of the language options in the three-language formula - as well as in higher education. It will
be taught not in isolation, but in interesting and innovative ways, and connected to other
contemporary and relevant subjects such as mathematics, astronomy, philosophy, linguistics,
dramatics, yoga, etc. Thus, in consonance with the rest of this policy, Sanskrit Universities too will
move towards becoming large multidisciplinary institutions of higher learning. Departments of
Sanskrit that conduct teaching and outstanding interdisciplinary research on Sanskrit and Sanskrit
Knowledge Systems will be established/strengthened across the new multidisciplinary higher
education system. Sanskrit will become a natural part of a holistic multidisciplinary higher education
if a student so chooses. Sanskrit teachers in large numbers will be professionalized across the
country in mission mode through the offering of 4-year integrated multidisciplinary B.Ed. dual
degrees in education and Sanskrit.

22.16. India will similarly expand its institutes and universities studying all classical languages and
literature, with strong efforts to collect, preserve, translate, and study the tens of thousands of
manuscripts that have not yet received their due attention. Sanskrit and all Indian language institutes
and departments across the country will be significantly strengthened, with adequate training given to
large new batches of students to study, in particular, the large numbers of manuscripts and their
interrelations with other subjects. Classical language institutes will aim to be merged with
universities, while maintaining their autonomy, so that faculty may work, and students too may be
trained as part of robust and rigorous multidisciplinary programmes. Universities dedicated to
languages will become multidisciplinary, towards the same end; where relevant, they may then also
offer B.Ed. dual degrees in education and a language, to develop outstanding language teachers in
that language. Further, it is also proposed that a new institution for Languages will be established.
National Institute (or Institutes) for Pali, Persian and Prakrit will also be set up within a university
campus. Similar initiatives will be carried out for institutes and universities studying Indian arts, art
history, and Indology. Research for outstanding work in all these areas will be supported by the NRF.

22.17. Efforts to preserve and promote all Indian languages including classical, tribal and endangered
languages will be taken on with new vigour. Technology and crowdsourcing, with extensive
participation of the people, will play a crucial role in these efforts.

22.18. For each of the languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India,
Academies will be established consisting of some of the greatest scholars and native speakers todetermine simple yet accurate vocabulary for the latest concepts, and to release the latest dictionaries
on a regular basis (analogous to the successful efforts for many other languages around the world).
The Academies would also consult with each other, and in some cases take the best suggestions from
the public, in order to construct these dictionaries attempting to adopt common words whenever
possible. These dictionaries would be widely disseminated, for use in education, journalism, writing,
speechmaking, and beyond, and would be available on the web as well as in book form. These
Academies for Eighth Schedule languages will be established by the Central Government in
consultation or collaboration with State Governments. Academies for other highly spoken Indian
languages may also be similarly established by the Centre and/or States.

22.19. All languages in India, and their associated arts and culture will be documented through a
web-based platform/portal/wiki, in order to preserve endangered and all Indian languages and their
associated rich local arts and culture. The platform will contain videos, dictionaries, recordings, and
more, of people (especially elders) speaking the language, telling stories, reciting poetry, and
performing plays, folk songs and dances, and more. People from across the country will be invited to
contribute to these efforts by adding relevant material onto these platforms/portals/wikis. Universities
and their research teams will work with each other and with communities across the country towards
enriching such platforms. These preservation efforts, and the associated research projects, e.g., in
history, archaeology, linguistics, etc., will be funded by the NRF.

22.20. Scholarships for people of all ages to study Indian Languages, Arts, and Culture with local
masters and/or within the higher education system will be established. The promotion of Indian
languages is possible only if they are used regularly and if they are used for teaching and learning.
Incentives, such as prizes for outstanding poetry and prose in Indian languages across categories, will
be established to ensure vibrant poetry, novels, nonfiction books, textbooks, journalism, and other
works in all Indian languages. Proficiency in Indian languages will be included as part of
qualification parameters for employment opportunities.


23. Technology Use and Integration

23.1. India is a global leader in information and communication technology and in other cutting-edge
domains, such as space. The Digital India Campaign is helping to transform the entire nation into a
digitally empowered society and knowledge economy. While education will play a critical role in this
transformation, technology itself will play an important role in the improvement of educational
processes and outcomes; thus, the relationship between technology and education at all levels is bi-
directional.

23.2. Given the explosive pace of technological development allied with the sheer creativity of tech-
savvy teachers and entrepreneurs including student entrepreneurs, it is certain that technology will
impact education in multiple ways, only some of which can be foreseen at the present time. New
technologies involving artificial intelligence, machine learning, block chains, smart boards, handheld
computing devices, adaptive computer testing for student development, and other forms of
educational software and hardware will not just change what students learn in the classroom but how
they learn, and thus these areas and beyond will require extensive research both on the technological
as well as educational fronts.

23.3. Use and integration of technology to improve multiple aspects of education will be supported
and adopted, provided these interventions are rigorously and transparently evaluated in relevant
contexts before they are scaled up. An autonomous body, the National Educational Technology
Forum (NETF), will be created to provide a platform for the free exchange of ideas on the use of
technology to enhance learning, assessment, planning, administration, and so on, both for school and
higher education. The aim of the NETF will be to facilitate decision making on the induction,
deployment, and use of technology, by providing to the leadership of education institutions, State and
Central governments, and other stakeholders, the latest knowledge and research as well as the
opportunity to consult and share best practices. The NETF will have the following functions:a) provide independent evidence-based advice to Central and State Government agencies on
technology-based interventions;
b) build intellectual and institutional capacities in educational technology;
c) envision strategic thrust areas in this domain; and
d) articulate new directions for research and innovation.

23.4. To remain relevant in the fast-changing field of educational technology, the NETF will maintain
a regular inflow of authentic data from multiple sources including educational technology innovators
and practitioners and will engage with a diverse set of researchers to analyze the data. To support the
development of a vibrant body of knowledge and practice, the NETF will organize multiple regional
and national conferences, workshops, etc. to solicit inputs from national and international educational
technology researchers, entrepreneurs, and practitioners.

23.5. The thrust of technological interventions will be for the purposes of improving teaching-
learning and evaluation processes, supporting teacher preparation and professional development,
enhancing educational access, and streamlining educational planning, management, and
administration including processes related to admissions, attendance, assessments, etc.

23.6. A rich variety of educational software, for all the above purposes, will be developed and made
available for students and teachers at all levels. All such software will be available in all major Indian
languages and will be accessible to a wide range of users including students in remote areas and
Divyang students. Teaching-learning e-content will continue to be developed by all States in all
regional languages, as well as by the NCERT, CIET, CBSE, NIOS, and other bodies/institutions, and
will be uploaded onto the DIKSHA platform. This platform may also be utilized for Teacher’s
Professional Development through e-content. CIET will be strengthened to promote and expand
DIKSHA as well as other education technology initiatives. Suitable equipment will be made available
to teachers at schools so that teachers can suitably integrate e-contents into teaching-learning
practices. Technology-based education platforms, such as DIKSHA/SWAYAM, will be better
integrated across school and higher education, and will include ratings/reviews by users, so as to
enable content developers create user friendly and qualitative content.

23.7. Particular attention will need to be paid to emerging disruptive technologies that will
necessarily transform the education system. When the 1986/1992 National Policy on Education was
formulated, it was difficult to predict the disruptive effect that the internet would have brought. Our
present education system's inability to cope with these rapid and disruptive changes places us
individually and nationally at a perilous disadvantage in an increasingly competitive world. For
example, while computers have largely surpassed humans in leveraging factual and procedural
knowledge, our education at all levels excessively burdens students with such knowledge at the
expense of developing their higher-order competencies.

23.8. This policy has been formulated at a time when an unquestionably disruptive technology -
Artificial Intelligence (AI) 3D/7D Virtual Reality - has emerged. As the cost of AI-based prediction
falls, AI will be able to match or outperform and, therefore, be a valuable aid to even skilled
professionals such as doctors in certain predictive tasks. AI's disruptive potential in the workplace is
clear, and the education system must be poised to respond quickly. One of the permanent tasks of the
NETF will be to categorize emergent technologies based on their potential and estimated timeframe
for disruption, and to periodically present this analysis to MHRD. Based on these inputs, MHRD will
formally identify those technologies whose emergence demands responses from the education
system.

23.9. In response to MHRD's formal recognition of a new disruptive technology, the National
Research Foundation will initiate or expand research efforts in the technology. In the context of AI,
NRF may consider a three-pronged approach: (a) advancing core AI research, (b) developing and
deploying application-based research, and (c) advancing international research efforts to address
global challenges in areas such as healthcare, agriculture, and climate change using AI.
23.10. HEIs will play an active role not only in conducting research on disruptive technologies but
also in creating initial versions of instructional materials and courses including online courses in
cutting-edge domains and assessing their impact on specific areas such as professional education.
Once the technology has attained a level of maturity, HEIs with thousands of students will be ideally
placed to scale these teaching and skilling efforts, which will include targeted training for job
readiness. Disruptive technologies will make certain jobs redundant, and hence approaches to skilling
and deskilling that are both efficient and ensure quality will be of increasing importance to create and
sustain employment. Institutions will have autonomy to approve institutional and non-institutional
partners to deliver such training, which will be integrated with skills and higher education
frameworks.

23.11. Universities will aim to offer Ph.D. and Masters programmes in core areas such as Machine
Learning as well as multidisciplinary fields “AI + X” and professional areas like health care,
agriculture, and law. They may also develop and disseminate courses in these areas via platforms,
such as SWAYAM. For rapid adoption, HEIs may blend these online courses with traditional
teaching in undergraduate and vocational programmes. HEIs may also offer targeted training in low-
expertise tasks for supporting the AI value chain such as data annotation, image classification, and
speech transcription. Efforts to teach languages to school students will be dovetailed with efforts to
enhance Natural Language Processing for India’s diverse languages.

23.12. As disruptive technologies emerge, schooling and continuing education will assist in raising
the general populace’s awareness of their potential disruptive effects and will also address related
issues. This awareness is necessary to have informed public consent on matters related to these
technologies. In school, the study of current affairs and ethical issues will include a discussion on
disruptive technologies such as those identified by NETF/MHRD. Appropriate instructional and
discussion materials will also be prepared for continuing education.

23.13. Data is a key fuel for AI-based technologies, and it is critical to raise awareness on issues of
privacy, laws, and standards associated with data handling and data protection, etc. It is also
necessary to highlight ethical issues surrounding the development and deployment of AI-based
technologies. Education will play a key role in these awareness raising efforts. Other disruptive
technologies that are expected to change the way we live, and, therefore, change the way we educate
students, include those relating to clean and renewable energy, water conservation, sustainable
farming, environmental preservation, and other green initiatives; these will also receive prioritized
attention in education.


24. Online and Digital Education: Ensuring Equitable Use of Technology

24.1. New circumstances and realities require new initiatives. The recent rise in epidemics and
pandemics necessitates that we are ready with alternative modes of quality education whenever and
wherever traditional and in-person modes of education are not possible. In this regard, the National
Education Policy 2020 recognizes the importance of leveraging the advantages of technology while
acknowledging its potential risks and dangers. It calls for carefully designed and appropriately scaled
pilot studies to determine how the benefits of online/digital education can be reaped while addressing
or mitigating the downsides. In the meantime, the existing digital platforms and ongoing ICT-based
educational initiatives must be optimized and expanded to meet the current and future challenges in
providing quality education for all.

24.2. However, the benefits of online/digital education cannot be leveraged unless the digital divide is
eliminated through concerted efforts, such as the Digital India campaign and the availability of
affordable computing devices. It is important that the use of technology for online and digital
education adequately addresses concerns of equity.

24.3. Teachers require suitable training and development to be effective online educators. It cannot be
assumed that a good teacher in a traditional classroom will automatically be a good teacher in an
online classroom. Aside from changes required in pedagogy, online assessments also require adifferent approach. There are numerous challenges to conducting online examinations at scale,
including limitations on the types of questions that can be asked in an online environment, handling
network and power disruptions, and preventing unethical practices. Certain types of courses/subjects,
such as performing arts and science practical have limitations in the online/digital education space,
which can be overcome to a partial extent with innovative measures. Further, unless online education
is blended with experiential and activity-based learning, it will tend to become a screen-based
education with limited focus on the social, affective and psychomotor dimensions of learning.

24.4. Given the emergence of digital technologies and the emerging importance of leveraging
technology for teaching-learning at all levels from school to higher education, this Policy
recommends the following key initiatives:
(a) Pilot studies for online education: Appropriate agencies, such as the NETF, CIET, NIOS,
IGNOU, IITs, NITs, etc. will be identified to conduct a series of pilot studies, in parallel, to
evaluate the benefits of integrating education with online education while mitigating the
downsides and also to study related areas, such as, student device addiction, most preferred
formats of e-content, etc. The results of these pilot studies will be publicly communicated and
used for continuous improvement.
(b) Digital infrastructure: There is a need to invest in creation of open, interoperable, evolvable,
public digital infrastructure in the education sector that can be used by multiple platforms and
point solutions, to solve for India’s scale, diversity, complexity and device penetration. This will
ensure that the technology-based solutions do not become outdated with the rapid advances in
technology.
(c) Online teaching platform and tools: Appropriate existing e-learning platforms such as
SWAYAM, DIKSHA, will be extended to provide teachers with a structured, user-friendly, rich
set of assistive tools for monitoring progress of learners. Tools, such as, two-way video and two-
way-audio interface for holding online classes are a real necessity as the present pandemic has
shown.
(d) Content creation, digital repository, and dissemination: A digital repository of content
including creation of coursework, Learning Games & Simulations, Augmented Reality and
Virtual Reality will be developed, with a clear public system for ratings by users on effectiveness
and quality. For fun based learning student-appropriate tools like apps, gamification of Indian art
and culture, in multiple languages, with clear operating instructions, will also be created. A
reliable backup mechanism for disseminating e-content to students will be provided.
(e) Addressing the digital divide: Given the fact that there still persists a substantial section of the
population whose digital access is highly limited, the existing mass media, such as television,
radio, and community radio will be extensively used for telecast and broadcasts. Such educational
programmes will be made available 24/7 in different languages to cater to the varying needs of
the student population. A special focus on content in all Indian languages will be emphasized and
required; digital content will need to reach the teachers and students in their medium of
instruction as far as possible.
(f) Virtual Labs: Existing e-learning platforms such as DIKSHA, SWAYAM and
SWAYAMPRABHA will also be leveraged for creating virtual labs so that all students have
equal access to quality practical and hands-on experiment-based learning experiences. The
possibility of providing adequate access to SEDG students and teachers through suitable digital
devices, such as tablets with pre-loaded content, will be considered and developed.
(g) Training and incentives for teachers: Teachers will undergo rigorous training in learner-centric
pedagogy and on how to become high-quality online content creators themselves using online
teaching platforms and tools. There will be emphasis on the teacher’s role in facilitating active
student engagement with the content and with each other.
(h) Online assessment and examinations: Appropriate bodies, such as the proposed National
Assessment Centre or PARAKH, School Boards, NTA, and other identified bodies will design
and implement assessment frameworks encompassing design of competencies, portfolio, rubrics,
standardized assessments, and assessment analytics. Studies will be undertaken to pilot new ways
of assessment using education technologies focusing on 21
st 
century skills.
(i) Blended models of learning: While promoting digital learning and education, the importance of
face-to-face in-person learning is fully recognized. Accordingly, different effective models of
blended learning will be identified for appropriate replication for different subjects.
(j) Laying down standards: As research on online/digital education emerges, NETF and other
appropriate bodies shall set up standards of content, technology, and pedagogy for online/digital
teaching-learning. These standards will help to formulate guidelines for e-learning by States,
Boards, schools and school complexes, HEIs, etc.

24.5 Creating a Dedicated Unit for Building of World Class, Digital Infrastructure,
Educational Digital Content and Capacity
Technology in education is a journey and not a destination and capacity will be needed to orchestrate
the various ecosystem players to implement policy objectives. A dedicated unit for the purpose of
orchestrating the building of digital infrastructure, digital content and capacity building will
be created in the Ministry to look after the e-education needs of both school and higher
education. Since technology is rapidly evolving, and needs specialists to deliver high quality
e-learning, a vibrant ecosystem has to be encouraged to create solutions that not only solve
India’s challenges of scale, diversity, equity, but also evolve in keeping with the rapid
changes in technology, whose half-life reduces with each passing year. This centre will,
therefore, consist of experts drawn from the field of administration, education, educational
technology, digital pedagogy and assessment, e-governance, etc.