Part IV. MAKING IT HAPPEN


25. Strengthening the Central Advisory Board of Education

25.1. Achieving successful implementation of this policy demands a long-term vision, availability of
expertise on a sustained basis, and concerted action from all concerned encompassing National, State,
institutional, and individual levels. In this context, the Policy recommends strengthening and
empowering the Central Advisory Board of Education (CABE) which will have a much greater
mandate and not only a forum for widespread consultation and examination of issues relating to
educational and cultural development. The remodeled and rejuvenated CABE shall also be
responsible for developing, articulating, evaluating, and revising the vision of education in the
country on a continuous basis, in close collaboration with MHRD and the corresponding apex bodies
of States. It shall also create and continuously review the institutional frameworks that shall help
attain this vision.

25.2. To bring the focus back on education and learning, it is desirable that the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (MHRD) be re-designated as the Ministry of Education (MoE).


26. Financing: Affordable and Quality Education for All

26.1. The Policy commits to significantly raising educational investment, as there is no better
investment towards a society’s future than the high-quality education of our young people.
Unfortunately, public expenditure on education in India has not come close to the recommended level
of 6% of GDP, as envisaged by the 1968 Policy, reiterated in the Policy of 1986, and which was
further reaffirmed in the 1992 review of the Policy. The current public (Government - Centre and
States) expenditure on education in India has been around 4.43% of GDP (Analysis of Budgeted
Expenditure 2017-18) and only around 10% of the total Government spending towards education
(Economic Survey 2017-18). These numbers are far smaller than most developed and developing
countries.

26.2. In order to attain the goal of education with excellence and the corresponding multitude of
benefits to this Nation and its economy, this Policy unequivocally endorses and envisions a
substantial increase in public investment in education by both the Central government and all State
Governments. The Centre and the States will work together to increase the public investment in
Education sector to reach 6% of GDP at the earliest. This is considered extremely critical for
achieving the high-quality and equitable public education system that is truly needed for India's future
economic, social, cultural, intellectual, and technological progress and growth.

26.3. In particular, financial support will be provided to various critical elements and components of
education, such as ensuring universal access, learning resources, nutritional support, matters of
student safety and well-being, adequate numbers of teachers and staff, teacher development, and
support for all key initiatives towards equitable high-quality education for underprivileged and socio-
economically disadvantaged groups.

26.4. In addition to one-time expenditures, primarily related to infrastructure and resources, this
Policy identifies the following key long-term thrust areas for financing to cultivate an education
system: (a) universal provisioning of quality early childhood care education; (b) ensuring
foundational literacy and numeracy; (c) providing adequate and appropriate resourcing of school
complexes/clusters; (d) providing food and nutrition (breakfast and midday meals); (e) investing in
teacher education and continuing professional development of teachers; (f) revamping colleges and
universities to foster excellence; (g) cultivating research; and (h) extensive use of technology and
online education.

26.5. Even the low level of funding on education in India, is frequently not spent in a timely manner
at the District/institution level, hampering the achievement of the intended targets of those funds.
Hence, the need is to increase efficiency in use of available budget by suitable policy changes.
Financial governance and management will focus on the smooth, timely, and appropriate flow of
funds, and their usage with probity; administrative processes will be suitably amended and
streamlined so that the disbursal mechanism may not lead to a high volume of unspent balances. The
provisions of GFR, PFMS and ‘Just in Time’ release to implementing agencies will be followed for
efficient use of government resources and avoiding parking of funds. Mechanism of performance-
based funding to States / HEIs may be devised. Similarly, efficient mechanism will be ensured for the
optimal allocation and utilization of funds earmarked for SEDGs. The new suggested regulatory
regime, with clear separations of roles and transparent self-disclosures, empowerment and autonomy
to institutions, and the appointment of outstanding and qualified experts to leadership positions will
help to enable a far smoother, quicker, and more transparent flow of funds.

26.6. The Policy also calls for the rejuvenation, active promotion, and support for private
philanthropic activity in the education sector. In particular, over and above the public budgetary
support which would have been otherwise provided to them, any public institution can take initiatives
towards raising private philanthropic funds to enhance educational experiences.

26.7. The matter of commercialization of education has been dealt with by the Policy through
multiple relevant fronts, including: the ‘light but tight’ regulatory approach that mandates full public
self-disclosure of finances, procedures, course and programme offerings, and educational outcomes;
the substantial investment in public education; and mechanisms for good governance of all
institutions, public and private. Similarly, opportunities for higher cost recovery without affecting the
needy or deserving sections will also be explored.


27. Implementation

27.1. Any policy’s effectiveness depends on its implementation. Such implementation will require
multiple initiatives and actions, which will have to be taken by multiple bodies in a synchronized and
systematic manner. Therefore, the implementation of this Policy will be led by various bodies
including MHRD, CABE, Union and State Governments, education-related Ministries, State
Departments of Education, Boards, NTA, the regulatory bodies of school and higher education,
NCERT, SCERTs, schools, and HEIs along with timelines and a plan for review, in order to ensure
that the policy is implemented in its spirit and intent, through coherence in planning and synergy
across all these bodies involved in education.

27.2. Implementation will be guided by the following principles. First, implementation of the spirit
and intent of the Policy will be the most critical matter. Second, it is important to implement the
policy initiatives in a phased manner, as each policy point has several steps, each of which requires
the previous step to be implemented successfully. Third, prioritization will be important in ensuring
optimal sequencing of policy points, and that the most critical and urgent actions are taken up first,
thereby enabling a strong base. Fourth, comprehensiveness in implementation will be key; as this
Policy is interconnected and holistic, only a full-fledged implementation, and not a piecemeal one,
will ensure that the desired objectives are achieved. Fifth, since education is a concurrent subject, it
will need careful planning, joint monitoring, and collaborative implementation between the Centre
and States. Sixth, timely infusion of requisite resources - human, infrastructural, and financial - at the
Central and State levels will be crucial for the satisfactory execution of the Policy. Finally, careful
analysis and review of the linkages between multiple parallel implementation steps will be necessary
in order to ensure effective dovetailing of all initiatives. This will also include early investment in
some of the specific actions (such as the setting up of early childhood care and education
infrastructure) that will be imperative to ensuring a strong base and a smooth progression for all
subsequent programmes and actions.

27.3. Subject-wise implementation committees of experts in cooperation and consultation with other
relevant Ministries will be set up at both the Central and State levels to develop detailed
implementation plans for each aspect of this Policy in accordance with the above principles to
achieve the goals of the Policy in a clear and phased manner. Yearly joint reviews of the progress of
implementation of the policy, in accordance with the targets set for each action, will be conducted by
designated teams constituted by MHRD and the States, and reviews will be shared with CABE. In the
decade of 2030-40, the entire policy will be in an operational mode, following which another
comprehensive review will be undertaken.
